---
Title: Faithfulness
Subtitle: Different seasons, different responsibilities.
Date: 2015-06-18 17:00
Tags: [family, writing]
---

It's been a lot more than a month since the promised monthly update. I'll blame
it on a lack of self-discipline... or perhaps on the presence thereof.

Every day, we face choices about where to spend our time. In this particular
season of life, that has often meant not writing, even things I *want* to write.
I have a family to care for, a church to serve, work to do, and schoolwork to
accomplish. Family is a daily endeavor, work and school nearly so, and church
regular if not quite daily. In the midst of that, I have to decide: *What will I
do today?*

Our culture tends to put the question in terms of balance; my friend and pastor
Ashok Nachnani suggested to me a while back that it is better to think in terms
of *faithfulness*. "Balance" suggests holding all these things in equal
proportion, juggling them against each other. "Faithfulness" suggests fulfilling
the responsibilities as best we can, with the time we are given. The actual
day-to-day outcome may not look particularly different, but it is an important
shift in the way we think nonetheless. To be faithful may mean letting some
desireable things go, and it may mean doing some things in a different way or to
a lesser degree than we might like.

Writing, for example.

I *love* writing. I like keeping a public record for my friends and family to
see how my life is. I enjoy stretching my mental muscles in the way that writing
requires. I enjoy thinking through pen or keyboard. But faithfulness to the
responsibilities God has given me right now means *not* trying to balance those
desires against each other, and instead doing what is best for my family and my
church. For the most part, right now that means not writing.

As I put it to Jaimie a while back, at this point in life I have time for one
hobby---and only one. That hobby, at this point, is fitness. I run half
marathons, and now I do triathlons (first one coming up in 10 days!). That takes
up a non-trivial amount of time every week. It helps me in the other areas of my
life, to be sure: it helps me be less physically tired, improves my focus in
school and work, and serves to maintain my health. Nonetheless, it is hobby-like
and it takes a substantial amount of time every day.

So right now, I write a great deal less than I want, and a great deal less than
I did in college or early in our marriage. I miss the days when I had time to
work on poetry for hours at a stretch, or simply to muse for a few thousand
words. But it is far more important for me to spend time with Ellie and Kate
than it is to write poetry, or to compose music, right now. Lord willing, I have
55--60 years ahead of me. Of those years, they will be close only another
15--20, and they will be the age they are today *only for today*. As much as
writing and composing and hobby programming all look appealing to me, and as
much as those really are good expressions of the ways God has gifted me,
focusing on them would not be the most *faithful* use of my time---not today.

This is not to say that writing and composing and developing interesting
software are not important. Rather: they *are* good and valuable things. But
they are things to focus on at other times in life. As fast as this life goes,
and I am increasingly aware that it goes quickly indeed, I can expect in the
ordinary course of things to have *many* years available for those things. I can
exercise my gifts faithfully in the right time and season. Today, I can learn to
love my little girls well, invest deeply in their lives, and savor moments that
will never come back.

Most of all, I must remind myself that teaching and shaping them is easily the
most significant thing I will ever do. Should I write an essay that persuaded a
thousand people to change their views on the arts, or to adopt a better view of
the church, still my impact on two little lives would be more important. If I
can point them faithfully to Christ and help them learn to walk faithfully with
him as healthy members of his body, that will be a good life to have lived.
Everything else is icing on the cake.

Icing is good, for the record. Sometimes, in these sorts of posts, we can
mistake *relative importance* for *absolute importance*. I should, at various
times in my life, make sure to exercise the good gifts God has given me in ways
appropriate to that time and context. Right now, that means continuing to write,
but less frequently. In the future, it will mean something else.

And all of this must stand in the context of resurrection hope. Too often, I
live---too often, we *all* live---as though the next 60 years are all we may
expect, the only time for writing and composing and so on. But it is not. I look
forward to endless ages of creativity, exercising those gifts *more* fully than
I am able now. So: Lord Jesus, come soon. And in the meantime, may I be faithful
in each season to do as well as I can.