content/links/combatting-generational-poverty.md, before:

Title: Combatting Generational Poverty Through Early Childhood Intervention
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-16 17:00
Link: http://www.canonandculture.com/combatting-generational-poverty-through-early-childhood-intervention/
Tags: links
Category: theology
Template: formats/link

Great piece here from Alan Noble, who is increasingly showing himself to be one
of the sharpest guys around.

> It seems inevitable that our country will try to combat generational poverty
> and all its great harms by investing heavily in early childhood intervention.
> We already see signs of the State moving towards such programs with President
> Obama’s 2013 State of the Union address and Mayor de Blasio’s expanded pre-K.
> Tragically and despite enormous costs, de Blasio’s pre-K initiative in New
> York will most likely have very modest results, particularly since it begins
> intervention at age four, so late in the child’s mental development. The
> question for the church is, will we allow the state to take the initiative, or
> will we take up this task and engender the kind of deep, redemptive healing
> that the state can only dream of?

You should (1) [read the rest of this piece][link] and (2) read lots more by him
and other sharp guys at his homebase [Christ and Pop Culture][capc].

[link]: http://www.canonandculture.com/combatting-generational-poverty-through-early-childhood-intervention/
[capc]: http://christandpopculture.com

Commit message:

Fix output of meta description on item template.

content/links/combatting-generational-poverty.md, after:

Title: Combatting Generational Poverty Through Early Childhood Intervention
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-16 17:00
Link: http://www.canonandculture.com/combatting-generational-poverty-through-early-childhood-intervention/
Tags: links
Category: theology
Template: formats/link
Description: Link: It seems inevitable that our country will try to combat generational poverty and all its great harms by investing heavily in early childhood intervention. The question for the church is, will we allow the state to take the initiative, or will we take up this task and engender the kind of deep, redemptive healing that the state can only dream of?

Great piece here from Alan Noble, who is increasingly showing himself to be one
of the sharpest guys around.

> It seems inevitable that our country will try to combat generational poverty
> and all its great harms by investing heavily in early childhood intervention.
> We already see signs of the State moving towards such programs with President
> Obama’s 2013 State of the Union address and Mayor de Blasio’s expanded pre-K.
> Tragically and despite enormous costs, de Blasio’s pre-K initiative in New
> York will most likely have very modest results, particularly since it begins
> intervention at age four, so late in the child’s mental development. The
> question for the church is, will we allow the state to take the initiative, or
> will we take up this task and engender the kind of deep, redemptive healing
> that the state can only dream of?

You should (1) [read the rest of this piece][link] and (2) read lots more by him
and other sharp guys at his homebase [Christ and Pop Culture][capc].

[link]: http://www.canonandculture.com/combatting-generational-poverty-through-early-childhood-intervention/
[capc]: http://christandpopculture.com
