content/tech/marvel-nailed-it.md, before:

Title: Nailed It
Subtitle: Marvel Actually Understands New Media
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-10-22 22:15

Yesterday, something rather remarkable happened. Someone leaked a copy of the
trailer for _Avengers: Age of Ultron_... and Marvel, rather than throwing a
hissy fit, just tweeted:

> Dammit, Hydra. ([October 22, 7:50 PM EST][hydra])

Pitch perfect. It's self-aware, self-*referential* in a funny way without being
too clever-seeming or coming off like it's trying too hard, and just a generally
good response.  The team could have fought it (though ultimately that would have
just made things worse), but instead Marvel played its hand perfectly. The
response was was funny *and* demonstrated that the folks who work there actually
understand how the internet works.

That alone would have been good enough to put Marvel in a league of its own when
it comes to managing things *not* going the way hoped for. But (after what I'm
sure was considerable back-room wrangling), they followed it up an hour and a
half later with another, equally fantastic tweet:

> Here it is! Watch the [@Avengers][@av]: [\#AgeofUltron][aou-hash] Teaser
> Trailer right NOW: <http://youtu.be/tmeOjFno6Do> [\#Avengers][av-hash]
> ([October 22, 9:18 PM EST][trailer-tweet])

Your average old-media company these days would have thrown a fit and made a
stink about the release of their media. They would have done everything in their
power to get the video taken down. Many companies *have* done just that under
similar circumstances, aiming to get the trailer, snippets of the movie, music,
or the like removed from the internet. But that simply isn't how the internet
works: it famously "treats censorship like damage and routes around it" ([John
Gilmore][censorship]). Once a video is online, it's online. Someone, somewhere,
still has a copy of it and can put it back up. So rather than fight it... Marvel
just rolled with it and made the best of the situation. They cracked a joke,
went ahead and put the trailer out themselves, and earned general approval from
the internet. Again.

Despite being a decades-old company, Marvel is clearly a new media company
through and through at this point. They managed to dodge the [Streisand
effect][streisand] quite nicely, turning what could have been an opportunity for
hostility all around into a PR coup and a win that they couldn't have scored on
their own.

Other old (and new!) media companies, take note. *This* is the way you play the
game. You recognize when the cat is out of the bag and you run with it. Own it.
Make it your own somehow. Don't let it own you. The internet is a big, crazy,
chaotic place, and you can never hope to control it---nor even the narrative
about you and your stuff, whatever that may be---like you might have been able
to do twenty-five years ago. But that's okay. If you can roll with the punches,
you can still come out ahead, and you'll look a little more human doing it. I
call that winning.

(Go Marvel.)

[hydra]: https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525071656306626560
[trailer-tweet]: https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525093857772318720
[@av]: https://twitter.com/Avengers
[aou-hash]: https://twitter.com/hashtag/AgeofUltron?src=hash
[av-hash]: https://twitter.com/hashtag/Avengers?src=hash
[censorship]: http://www.chemie.fu-berlin.de/outerspace/internet-article.html
[streisand]: http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2013/04/economist-explains-what-streisand-effect

Commit message:

Add description for Marvel post.

content/tech/marvel-nailed-it.md, after:

Title: Nailed It
Subtitle: Marvel Actually Understands New Media
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-10-22 22:15
Description: Someone leaked a copy of the trailer for Avengers: Age of Ultron&hellip; and Marvel didn&rsquo;t throw a fit. Quite the opposite, in fact.

Yesterday, something rather remarkable happened. Someone leaked a copy of the
trailer for _Avengers: Age of Ultron_... and Marvel, rather than throwing a
hissy fit, just tweeted:

> Dammit, Hydra. ([October 22, 7:50 PM EST][hydra])

Pitch perfect. It's self-aware, self-*referential* in a funny way without being
too clever-seeming or coming off like it's trying too hard, and just a generally
good response.  The team could have fought it (though ultimately that would have
just made things worse), but instead Marvel played its hand perfectly. The
response was was funny *and* demonstrated that the folks who work there actually
understand how the internet works.

That alone would have been good enough to put Marvel in a league of its own when
it comes to managing things *not* going the way hoped for. But (after what I'm
sure was considerable back-room wrangling), they followed it up an hour and a
half later with another, equally fantastic tweet:

> Here it is! Watch the [@Avengers][@av]: [\#AgeofUltron][aou-hash] Teaser
> Trailer right NOW: <http://youtu.be/tmeOjFno6Do> [\#Avengers][av-hash]
> ([October 22, 9:18 PM EST][trailer-tweet])

Your average old-media company these days would have thrown a fit and made a
stink about the release of their media. They would have done everything in their
power to get the video taken down. Many companies *have* done just that under
similar circumstances, aiming to get the trailer, snippets of the movie, music,
or the like removed from the internet. But that simply isn't how the internet
works: it famously "treats censorship like damage and routes around it" ([John
Gilmore][censorship]). Once a video is online, it's online. Someone, somewhere,
still has a copy of it and can put it back up. So rather than fight it... Marvel
just rolled with it and made the best of the situation. They cracked a joke,
went ahead and put the trailer out themselves, and earned general approval from
the internet. Again.

Despite being a decades-old company, Marvel is clearly a new media company
through and through at this point. They managed to dodge the [Streisand
effect][streisand] quite nicely, turning what could have been an opportunity for
hostility all around into a PR coup and a win that they couldn't have scored on
their own.

Other old (and new!) media companies, take note. *This* is the way you play the
game. You recognize when the cat is out of the bag and you run with it. Own it.
Make it your own somehow. Don't let it own you. The internet is a big, crazy,
chaotic place, and you can never hope to control it---nor even the narrative
about you and your stuff, whatever that may be---like you might have been able
to do twenty-five years ago. But that's okay. If you can roll with the punches,
you can still come out ahead, and you'll look a little more human doing it. I
call that winning.

(Go Marvel.)

[hydra]: https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525071656306626560
[trailer-tweet]: https://twitter.com/Marvel/status/525093857772318720
[@av]: https://twitter.com/Avengers
[aou-hash]: https://twitter.com/hashtag/AgeofUltron?src=hash
[av-hash]: https://twitter.com/hashtag/Avengers?src=hash
[censorship]: http://www.chemie.fu-berlin.de/outerspace/internet-article.html
[streisand]: http://www.economist.com/blogs/economist-explains/2013/04/economist-explains-what-streisand-effect
