content/tech/rust-and-swift-05.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (v)
Subtitle: The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.
Tags: software development
Date: 2015-09-12 13:45
Summary: >
  I have been learning Rust and Swift in parallel. I wouldn’t normally recommend
  this course of action, but I’m finding it enormously profitable. You might, 
  too, under the right circumstances.
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 5
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html

---

I've been working on learning Swift over the past couple weeks, and had spent
the month prior to that doing a deep first dive on Rust. This kind of approach,
learning two languages basically at the same time, is entirely new to me, and
for good reason. Programming languages are not trivial to learn, and to learn
them meaningfully one must practice with them a great deal.

I'm doing this largely of necessity. I'm hoping to build an application with a
very capable, performant cross-platform core language (Rust), but planning to
ship a native OS X app (first) when all is said and done. My desire to make the
core libraries portable rules out Swift immediately. To be frank, so does the
fact that it's an Apple language: I am happy to use Apple's tools on its
platform, but I don't want to shackle myself to their choices in the long run.
Too, having good Rust experience is likely to be valuable in many other
contexts.

So I need to learn both.

And, while I wouldn't ordinarily recommend this course of action---indeed,
unless you already have a fair bit of programming experience and already know
several languages, I'd actively recommend against it---I'm finding it enormously
profitable. The languages have been designed in roughly the same time frame,
cite many of the same influences, and overlap substantially in terms of audience
and goals. Yet they are, as this series has already highlighted, quite different
languages in many ways.

Learning them in parallel is helping me see the trade-offs each one has made,
and force me to think about *why* they differ in the ways they do. In
particular, I think I have a much better idea what's going on "under the covers"
in each language and therefore know what to expect of them better. This, in
turn, has dramatically deepened my grasp of the languages relative to the amount
I've been looking at them, compared to previous language-learning efforts. (It
also helps that I've already learned a number of languages, of course, and that
I've been pushing my brain into the learning-programming-languages space via
reading about Haskell, functional patterns in JavaScript, and so on this year.)

I have a long way to go in both languages, of course. Reading on nights and
weekends, and the little bit of playing I've been able to do with each of them,
is no replacement for just sinking my teeth into a project and finding the pain
points. Nonetheless, I'm really glad to be learning these two languages
*together*. If you're up for a challenge, try it sometime! You'll be surprised
how much you learn.

---

  - [Previous: Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
  - [Next: Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]

Commit message:

Update Rust-and-Swift posts with published IX.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-05.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (v)
Subtitle: The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.
Tags: software development
Date: 2015-09-12 13:45
Summary: >
  I have been learning Rust and Swift in parallel. I wouldn’t normally recommend
  this course of action, but I’m finding it enormously profitable. You might, 
  too, under the right circumstances.
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 5
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9. [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html

---

I've been working on learning Swift over the past couple weeks, and had spent
the month prior to that doing a deep first dive on Rust. This kind of approach,
learning two languages basically at the same time, is entirely new to me, and
for good reason. Programming languages are not trivial to learn, and to learn
them meaningfully one must practice with them a great deal.

I'm doing this largely of necessity. I'm hoping to build an application with a
very capable, performant cross-platform core language (Rust), but planning to
ship a native OS X app (first) when all is said and done. My desire to make the
core libraries portable rules out Swift immediately. To be frank, so does the
fact that it's an Apple language: I am happy to use Apple's tools on its
platform, but I don't want to shackle myself to their choices in the long run.
Too, having good Rust experience is likely to be valuable in many other
contexts.

So I need to learn both.

And, while I wouldn't ordinarily recommend this course of action---indeed,
unless you already have a fair bit of programming experience and already know
several languages, I'd actively recommend against it---I'm finding it enormously
profitable. The languages have been designed in roughly the same time frame,
cite many of the same influences, and overlap substantially in terms of audience
and goals. Yet they are, as this series has already highlighted, quite different
languages in many ways.

Learning them in parallel is helping me see the trade-offs each one has made,
and force me to think about *why* they differ in the ways they do. In
particular, I think I have a much better idea what's going on "under the covers"
in each language and therefore know what to expect of them better. This, in
turn, has dramatically deepened my grasp of the languages relative to the amount
I've been looking at them, compared to previous language-learning efforts. (It
also helps that I've already learned a number of languages, of course, and that
I've been pushing my brain into the learning-programming-languages space via
reading about Haskell, functional patterns in JavaScript, and so on this year.)

I have a long way to go in both languages, of course. Reading on nights and
weekends, and the little bit of playing I've been able to do with each of them,
is no replacement for just sinking my teeth into a project and finding the pain
points. Nonetheless, I'm really glad to be learning these two languages
*together*. If you're up for a challenge, try it sometime! You'll be surprised
how much you learn.

---

  - [Previous: Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
  - [Next: Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
