content/tech/rust-and-swift-01.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (i)
Subtitle: Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.
Date: 2015-09-04 22:59
Category: Tech
Tags: listicles, software development
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 1
modified: 2015-09-07 13:45
...

<i class=editorial>I started writing these responses in a Slack channel of
developers I participate in as I worked through the [Swift][Swift] [book][book]. I realized
after a bit that it would make a better blog post than chat room content, so
here we are. This is all entirely off-the-cuff: me just thinking out loud as I
read; this is by no means expert opinion.</i>

[Swift]: https://developer.apple.com/swift/
[book]: https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]

[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html

---

  - `..<` – seriously?

    That has to be one of the most annoying operators I've ever seen. It ends up
    with cognitive noise because `<name` initially processes as "starting a
    generic" and you have to re-parse it visually and mentally.

  - After the first chapter of the Swift book, my impression is "a poor man's
    Rust"; my gut feel based on that first pass and everything I've seen and
    read about Swift over the past two years is that it's roughly what you would
    get if you took Rust's syntax and replaced Rust's hard safety goals with the
    aim of mapping to ObjC semantics. (To be fair to Apple, that interoperability was probably necessary.)

  - An example that jumps out at me as immediately illustrative of the
    difference in approach the languages take is the way you pass structures by
    reference vs. copy. In Swift, that's done via two completely distinct
    language constructs, `struct`s and `class`es respectively.

    In Rust, there is just the `struct` type to handle both of those. They're
    immutable unless you declare them with `mut`, and you can pass them via copy
    simply by implementing the `Copy` `trait` (which seems roughly analogous to
    Swift's `protocol`, but I've not yet dig deeply enough to see how they
    differ). Those things aren't baked into the language, but use simpler
    language building blocks to define behavior into he library.

  - I saw someone do a write up a while back arguing that Go isn't a *bad*
    language, it just isn't a *good* language. My first impression of Swift,
    after having spent the last month with Rust, is very much along those lines.

  - Huh. Here's something that I appreciate about Rust, Haskell, and others now
    that I didn't before: there's a difference between implicitly/automatically
    importing a prelude or a given set of standard library functions, and having
    actually global functions. Does Swift actually have functions like `print`
    in a global namespace, as the book seems to imply, or they being imported
    automatically _a la_ Rust/Haskell/etc.?

    **Edit:** it appears Swift does likewise, but that you can't access the
    relevant module directly. Which is halfway there.

  - Hmm. Why have `Double` *and* `Float`---just for ObjC interop, I guess?

    **Edit:** follow-up from a conversation with a friend: it's because you have
    32- and 64-bit architectures out there; sometimes you don't want 64 bits of
    floating point precision for that reason. Note that Rust *also* has this
    distinction; you can declare things as `f32` or `f64`.

  - Extending the above note on `class`es and `struct`s and `protocol`s vs.
    Rust's approach: the same thing is true about `extension`, which is a
    distinct concept from implementing a `protocol`; again, in Rust these are
    both just handled with a single language construct, `impl`. That's not
    because `impl` is overloaded, but rather because the underlying language
    machinery is the same for the two things. (edited)

  - (I've a feeling learning Swift is going to turn me into even more of a Rust
    fanboy.)

  - Reading the two books in close sequence like this is proving really
    productive mentally for thinking about how the two handle the same issues.
    I've never done anything quite like this before, and it's fascinating.

  - I have an increased appreciation for Rust's use of semi-colons to turn
    expressions into statements, and thereby to distinguish clearly between the
    two (among other things, allowing for implicit return of anything that's an
    expression).

  - Another interesting comparison: Rust's `match` and Swift's `switch` and
    `case` fill the same role of pattern matching. I'm curious to see how they
    differ. Does Swift do matching on arbitrary expressions?

    Also, I see where the syntax choices came from in both, and while I slightly
    prefer Rust's, I think both make reasonably good sense; Swift's will
    understandably be more familiar to C and ObjC programmers, and that's a
    perfectly defensible approach. Seen that way, it is expanding on the C-style
    construct (even if it's actually doing something substantially more
    sophisticated than that under the hood by being a form of actual pattern
    matching).

---

  - [**Next:** Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]

Commit message:

Publish Rust-and-Swift posts 12 and 13.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-01.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (i)
Subtitle: Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.
Date: 2015-09-04 22:59
Category: Tech
Tags: listicles, software development
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 1
modified: 2015-09-07 13:45
...

<i class=editorial>I started writing these responses in a Slack channel of
developers I participate in as I worked through the [Swift][Swift] [book][book]. I realized
after a bit that it would make a better blog post than chat room content, so
here we are. This is all entirely off-the-cuff: me just thinking out loud as I
read; this is by no means expert opinion.</i>

[Swift]: https://developer.apple.com/swift/
[book]: https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]
12. [Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]
13. [Methods, instance and otherwise.][13]

[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html
[12]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xii.html
[13]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xiii.html

---

  - `..<` – seriously?

    That has to be one of the most annoying operators I've ever seen. It ends up
    with cognitive noise because `<name` initially processes as "starting a
    generic" and you have to re-parse it visually and mentally.

  - After the first chapter of the Swift book, my impression is "a poor man's
    Rust"; my gut feel based on that first pass and everything I've seen and
    read about Swift over the past two years is that it's roughly what you would
    get if you took Rust's syntax and replaced Rust's hard safety goals with the
    aim of mapping to ObjC semantics. (To be fair to Apple, that interoperability was probably necessary.)

  - An example that jumps out at me as immediately illustrative of the
    difference in approach the languages take is the way you pass structures by
    reference vs. copy. In Swift, that's done via two completely distinct
    language constructs, `struct`s and `class`es respectively.

    In Rust, there is just the `struct` type to handle both of those. They're
    immutable unless you declare them with `mut`, and you can pass them via copy
    simply by implementing the `Copy` `trait` (which seems roughly analogous to
    Swift's `protocol`, but I've not yet dig deeply enough to see how they
    differ). Those things aren't baked into the language, but use simpler
    language building blocks to define behavior into he library.

  - I saw someone do a write up a while back arguing that Go isn't a *bad*
    language, it just isn't a *good* language. My first impression of Swift,
    after having spent the last month with Rust, is very much along those lines.

  - Huh. Here's something that I appreciate about Rust, Haskell, and others now
    that I didn't before: there's a difference between implicitly/automatically
    importing a prelude or a given set of standard library functions, and having
    actually global functions. Does Swift actually have functions like `print`
    in a global namespace, as the book seems to imply, or they being imported
    automatically _a la_ Rust/Haskell/etc.?

    **Edit:** it appears Swift does likewise, but that you can't access the
    relevant module directly. Which is halfway there.

  - Hmm. Why have `Double` *and* `Float`---just for ObjC interop, I guess?

    **Edit:** follow-up from a conversation with a friend: it's because you have
    32- and 64-bit architectures out there; sometimes you don't want 64 bits of
    floating point precision for that reason. Note that Rust *also* has this
    distinction; you can declare things as `f32` or `f64`.

  - Extending the above note on `class`es and `struct`s and `protocol`s vs.
    Rust's approach: the same thing is true about `extension`, which is a
    distinct concept from implementing a `protocol`; again, in Rust these are
    both just handled with a single language construct, `impl`. That's not
    because `impl` is overloaded, but rather because the underlying language
    machinery is the same for the two things. (edited)

  - (I've a feeling learning Swift is going to turn me into even more of a Rust
    fanboy.)

  - Reading the two books in close sequence like this is proving really
    productive mentally for thinking about how the two handle the same issues.
    I've never done anything quite like this before, and it's fascinating.

  - I have an increased appreciation for Rust's use of semi-colons to turn
    expressions into statements, and thereby to distinguish clearly between the
    two (among other things, allowing for implicit return of anything that's an
    expression).

  - Another interesting comparison: Rust's `match` and Swift's `switch` and
    `case` fill the same role of pattern matching. I'm curious to see how they
    differ. Does Swift do matching on arbitrary expressions?

    Also, I see where the syntax choices came from in both, and while I slightly
    prefer Rust's, I think both make reasonably good sense; Swift's will
    understandably be more familiar to C and ObjC programmers, and that's a
    perfectly defensible approach. Seen that way, it is expanding on the C-style
    construct (even if it's actually doing something substantially more
    sophisticated than that under the hood by being a form of actual pattern
    matching).

---

  - [**Next:** Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
