content/tech/rust-and-swift-04.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (iv)
Subtitle: Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-10 21:05
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 4
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html

---

  - Both Swift and Rust directly address the issue of having to worry about
    memory allocation and safety. They do it in different ways, though: Swift by
    automatic reference counting, Rust by its concept of ownership. For a lot of
    day-to-day development, I can see the Swift approach being a win for the
    same reason a language like Python or Ruby is: having that all handled for
    you is *nice*. Having the power Rust gives you comes at the price of
    increased cognitive load from having to reason about ownership.

  - To put it another way: all programming languages have to make trade offs.
    Although I like Rust's better than Swift's so far, I've no doubt I will find
    any number of things to appreciate about Swift over Rust. You can't have
    everything.

  - This caught my attention in part because dealing with things like strings
    (or other pass-by-value types) in Swift is rather more straightforward than
    in Rust. The outcomes are much the same, but since *all* `String`s in Swift
    are passed by value (never by reference), you simply don't have to think
    about modification---even safe modification!

  - Rust of course had the `Copy` trait which lets you do this, but the point is
    that the "ergonomics" are slightly nicer in Swift.

  - Also, the string interpolation Swift does is *nice*. That's one thing I
    really wish Rust had. It's Python-style string formatting macro is great,
    but being able to interpolate values (`"strings with \(variables)"` or even
    `"embedded expressions like \(2 + 4)"`) is very nice.

  - Swift's approach to strings in general seems well-thought-through and gives
    appropriate levels of attention to the details which make handling complex
    or non-Western languages much more manageable. As a typography geek, I
    appreciate this a great deal.

  - That said, since Swift's strings *do* handle all those edge cases for
    Unicode, you lose some standard string access patterns and lose much (maybe
    all?) insight into the internal structure of the string. That may be good,
    and may be bad, depending on the circumstance. Like I said: trade-offs.

  - Actually, on reading further, the way Swift handles Unicode strings is
    pretty nice. It *does* give you insight into those, via specific methods for
    different representations. I particularly appreciate that it's you deal with
    them as the standalone `String` type as well as giving you direct access to
    the code points---and not just one Unicode code point set, but any of
    <abbr>UTF8</abbr>, <abbr>UTF16</abbr>, or <abbr>UTF32</abbr> (Unicode
    scalars). Trust Apple to pay close attention to text.

  - Rust's strings are *good*, but not quite as sophisticated (presumably for
    simplicity around the memory mapping). All Rust `String` or `str` instances
    are composed of <abbr>UTF32</abbr> Unicode scalars, encoded as
    <abbr>UTF8</abbr> sequences. It doesn't have some of the convenience methods
    Swift does for getting any of the other representations. That said, I expect
    this should show up rarely if at all in my ordinary usage. Importantly, the
    fundamental storage is the same: both use scalars.

This was the first section where it didn't feel like Rust was just a clear
overall "winner" over Swift. Some of the trade offs between the language designs
are more apparent here, and I do appreciate the "ergonomics" of Swift in a
number of these things.

---

  - [**Previous:** Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
  - [**Next:** The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]

Commit message:

Publish Rust-and-Swift posts 12 and 13.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-04.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (iv)
Subtitle: Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-10 21:05
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 4
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]
12. [Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]
13. [Methods, instance and otherwise.][13]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html
[12]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xii.html
[13]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xiii.html

---

  - Both Swift and Rust directly address the issue of having to worry about
    memory allocation and safety. They do it in different ways, though: Swift by
    automatic reference counting, Rust by its concept of ownership. For a lot of
    day-to-day development, I can see the Swift approach being a win for the
    same reason a language like Python or Ruby is: having that all handled for
    you is *nice*. Having the power Rust gives you comes at the price of
    increased cognitive load from having to reason about ownership.

  - To put it another way: all programming languages have to make trade offs.
    Although I like Rust's better than Swift's so far, I've no doubt I will find
    any number of things to appreciate about Swift over Rust. You can't have
    everything.

  - This caught my attention in part because dealing with things like strings
    (or other pass-by-value types) in Swift is rather more straightforward than
    in Rust. The outcomes are much the same, but since *all* `String`s in Swift
    are passed by value (never by reference), you simply don't have to think
    about modification---even safe modification!

  - Rust of course had the `Copy` trait which lets you do this, but the point is
    that the "ergonomics" are slightly nicer in Swift.

  - Also, the string interpolation Swift does is *nice*. That's one thing I
    really wish Rust had. It's Python-style string formatting macro is great,
    but being able to interpolate values (`"strings with \(variables)"` or even
    `"embedded expressions like \(2 + 4)"`) is very nice.

  - Swift's approach to strings in general seems well-thought-through and gives
    appropriate levels of attention to the details which make handling complex
    or non-Western languages much more manageable. As a typography geek, I
    appreciate this a great deal.

  - That said, since Swift's strings *do* handle all those edge cases for
    Unicode, you lose some standard string access patterns and lose much (maybe
    all?) insight into the internal structure of the string. That may be good,
    and may be bad, depending on the circumstance. Like I said: trade-offs.

  - Actually, on reading further, the way Swift handles Unicode strings is
    pretty nice. It *does* give you insight into those, via specific methods for
    different representations. I particularly appreciate that it's you deal with
    them as the standalone `String` type as well as giving you direct access to
    the code points---and not just one Unicode code point set, but any of
    <abbr>UTF8</abbr>, <abbr>UTF16</abbr>, or <abbr>UTF32</abbr> (Unicode
    scalars). Trust Apple to pay close attention to text.

  - Rust's strings are *good*, but not quite as sophisticated (presumably for
    simplicity around the memory mapping). All Rust `String` or `str` instances
    are composed of <abbr>UTF32</abbr> Unicode scalars, encoded as
    <abbr>UTF8</abbr> sequences. It doesn't have some of the convenience methods
    Swift does for getting any of the other representations. That said, I expect
    this should show up rarely if at all in my ordinary usage. Importantly, the
    fundamental storage is the same: both use scalars.

This was the first section where it didn't feel like Rust was just a clear
overall "winner" over Swift. Some of the trade offs between the language designs
are more apparent here, and I do appreciate the "ergonomics" of Swift in a
number of these things.

---

  - [**Previous:** Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
  - [**Next:** The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
