content/tech/rust-and-swift-02.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (ii)
Subtitle: Basic types and the syntax around them.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-06 10:20
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 2
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. Basic types and the syntax around them.
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9. [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html

---

  - At first blush, I find the extra syntax around optionals in Swift more
    confusing than helpful. I think this comes down to my preference for a more
    Python-like approach: "Explicit is better than implicit" and "There should
    be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it" both militate
    against the multiple different ways you can handle optional values in Swift.
    Optional types are created in one of two ways:

      + with the `?` operator on a type definition, creating an explicitly
        wrapped type which must be checked in some way.
      + with the `!` operator on a type definition, creating an "implicitly
        unwrapped optional" by forcibly unwrapping it (and creating a runtime
        error if the optional is empty)
  
    After creating an optional, you can get at its contents by:
  
      + using the `if let` or `while let` constructs to bind the optional
        value's non-`nil` value for a block
      + using the `!` operator on a variable name, explicitly unwrapping it (and
        creating a runtime error if the optional is empty)
    
    By contrast, in Rust you always have to explicitly unwrap the item, using
    the `unwrap` method or pattern matching. There are no implicitly unwrapped
    types. Moreover, there is no special syntax around creating optional types
    in Rust: you just declare them with an `Option` type or another type that
    `impl`s the `Option` behavior. The "shortcut" behavior around error
    handling, `try!`, isn't special syntax, but application of another standard
    language construct (in this case, a macro).

  - The discussion of `assert` in the Swift book re-raises the question about
    the global namespace:
    
    > "You write an assertion by calling the global `assert(_:_:)` function."
    
    This continues to suggest strongly that Swift does in fact have a true
    global namespace, *not* an automatically-imported prelude. That can make a
    big difference for applications in certain spaces (e.g. systems
    programming), when you might have good reason to want to replace the
    standard library's approach with a different one. (See Rust's [`#[no_std]`]
    docs and the [related RFC].)
    
  - In Rust, `assert!` is a macro, not a function, which is an interesting but
    perhaps not *especially* important distinction in this particular case. (It
    might be, though; I'd have to see the implementation of each to see how they
    play out differently.)
    
  - In any case, this also highlights another large difference between the two:
    testing is [front and center][rust-tests] in Rust, and barely receives a
    mention so far in the Swift book (and isn't in the table of contents).
    Having language-level support for testing is a big deal.

  - Language tour and first chapter of the language guide down, my sense is that
    Swift is a substantially better language than C or C++ (and presumably than
    Objective C, but since I don't know that language I can't speak to it) for
    app design, but that Rust is a better language yet. Both a far more modern
    than their predecessors, but they approach the same problems in surprisingly
    different ways, relatively similar syntax notwithstanding. So far, I like
    the Rust approach better.

  - In particular, more syntax is not my preferred way to tackle these things.
    Providing good language constructs and primitives on which to build seems
    better in *many* ways:

      + It substantially reduces the cognitive load for the developer, by
        keeping the number of constructs small and simply varying how they are
        applied.
      + It increases the quality of those primitives, because it forces the
        language deadness to make sure they actually address the full problem
        space.
      + It lets developers approach the same problem in ways the language design
        team may not have anticipated, and over time the community may find
        shared conventions that improve on the `std` approach, and nothing has
        to change in the language spec (or the compiler!) to adopt those
        changes.
      + In general, then, it makes change much easier to manage, and change can
        be community-driven rather than requiring the language design team to
        manage it.[^1]
    
[rust-tests]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/testing.html
[`#[no_std]`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/no-stdlib.html
[related RFC]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1184-stabilize-no_std.md

[^1]: This may of course be intentional on Apple's part with Swift. Maintaining
    tight control over its tooling is very typical of modern Apple.

---

  - [Next: Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
  - [Previous: Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]

Commit message:

Update Rust and Swift posts with link to 10.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-02.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (ii)
Subtitle: Basic types and the syntax around them.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-06 10:20
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 2
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  Basic types and the syntax around them.
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html

---

  - At first blush, I find the extra syntax around optionals in Swift more
    confusing than helpful. I think this comes down to my preference for a more
    Python-like approach: "Explicit is better than implicit" and "There should
    be one-- and preferably only one --obvious way to do it" both militate
    against the multiple different ways you can handle optional values in Swift.
    Optional types are created in one of two ways:

      + with the `?` operator on a type definition, creating an explicitly
        wrapped type which must be checked in some way.
      + with the `!` operator on a type definition, creating an "implicitly
        unwrapped optional" by forcibly unwrapping it (and creating a runtime
        error if the optional is empty)

    After creating an optional, you can get at its contents by:

      + using the `if let` or `while let` constructs to bind the optional
        value's non-`nil` value for a block
      + using the `!` operator on a variable name, explicitly unwrapping it (and
        creating a runtime error if the optional is empty)

    By contrast, in Rust you always have to explicitly unwrap the item, using
    the `unwrap` method or pattern matching. There are no implicitly unwrapped
    types. Moreover, there is no special syntax around creating optional types
    in Rust: you just declare them with an `Option` type or another type that
    `impl`s the `Option` behavior. The "shortcut" behavior around error
    handling, `try!`, isn't special syntax, but application of another standard
    language construct (in this case, a macro).

  - The discussion of `assert` in the Swift book re-raises the question about
    the global namespace:

    > "You write an assertion by calling the global `assert(_:_:)` function."

    This continues to suggest strongly that Swift does in fact have a true
    global namespace, *not* an automatically-imported prelude. That can make a
    big difference for applications in certain spaces (e.g. systems
    programming), when you might have good reason to want to replace the
    standard library's approach with a different one. (See Rust's [`#[no_std]`]
    docs and the [related RFC].)

  - In Rust, `assert!` is a macro, not a function, which is an interesting but
    perhaps not *especially* important distinction in this particular case. (It
    might be, though; I'd have to see the implementation of each to see how they
    play out differently.)

  - In any case, this also highlights another large difference between the two:
    testing is [front and center][rust-tests] in Rust, and barely receives a
    mention so far in the Swift book (and isn't in the table of contents).
    Having language-level support for testing is a big deal.

  - Language tour and first chapter of the language guide down, my sense is that
    Swift is a substantially better language than C or C++ (and presumably than
    Objective C, but since I don't know that language I can't speak to it) for
    app design, but that Rust is a better language yet. Both a far more modern
    than their predecessors, but they approach the same problems in surprisingly
    different ways, relatively similar syntax notwithstanding. So far, I like
    the Rust approach better.

  - In particular, more syntax is not my preferred way to tackle these things.
    Providing good language constructs and primitives on which to build seems
    better in *many* ways:

      + It substantially reduces the cognitive load for the developer, by
        keeping the number of constructs small and simply varying how they are
        applied.
      + It increases the quality of those primitives, because it forces the
        language deadness to make sure they actually address the full problem
        space.
      + It lets developers approach the same problem in ways the language design
        team may not have anticipated, and over time the community may find
        shared conventions that improve on the `std` approach, and nothing has
        to change in the language spec (or the compiler!) to adopt those
        changes.
      + In general, then, it makes change much easier to manage, and change can
        be community-driven rather than requiring the language design team to
        manage it.[^1]

[rust-tests]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/book/testing.html
[`#[no_std]`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/no-stdlib.html
[related RFC]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs/blob/master/text/1184-stabilize-no_std.md

[^1]: This may of course be intentional on Apple's part with Swift. Maintaining
    tight control over its tooling is very typical of modern Apple.

---

  - [Next: Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
  - [Previous: Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
