content/tech/rust-and-swift-09.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (ix)
Subtitle: Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-11-09 22:20
Modified: 2015-11-10 06:15
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 9
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past few months. As with the
other posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9. Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html

---

-   Right off the bat when looking at the definitions for Swift's and Rust's
    `enum` types, a difference pops out: the use of the keyword `case` to
    introduce an enum member in Swift. In one sense, this overloads that
    keyword, but in another sense it's fine: pattern matching and enums go hand
    in hand, so the use in both cases is fairly natural. Rust doesn't have any
    special syntax to designate the elements of an enum; they're just separated
    by commas.

-   I am not at all shocked to find that Swift has a variant syntax for its unit
    type case declarations, where a single `case` keyword precedes a list of
    comma-separated cases defined on a single line. (At this point, I would be
    more surprised *not* to find a variant syntax for something in Swift!)

-   Something truly wonderful about both a Rust and Swift: enumerated types
    aren't just wrappers around integer values. They're real types of their own.
    This is powerful.

-   Rust and Swift also share in having enumerated types that can hold values.
    The most prominent of these so far in the Swift book are optionals, the
    `Optional` enum type, corresponding very closely to Rust's `Option` type.
    Having had these for a bit in playing with Rust, and having gotten familiar
    with the utility of types like these while reading [_Maybe Haskell_]---a
    delightful book which introduces Haskell and functional programming using
    Haskell's `Maybe` type---I now miss them profoundly in languages which don't
    have them. (Which is to say: every language I use on a regular basis
    professionally: C, C++, Python, JavaScript, etc.).

-   Swift's enum types don't have integer values *by default*---but they can
    have them if you define a type and assign a value to each enum case at the
    definition. These "raw values" are distinct from the "associated values"
    noted just above. I expect these exist primarily for ease of interoperation
    with Objective-C.

-   Rust doesn't have anything like this, at least that I can think of. The main
    place it would be useful would be for foreign function interfaces (as in
    Swift), and this is one of several such gaps in Rust, along with the lack of
    a straightforward way to map to C's `union` types. There are trade offs in
    terms of adding the functionality to the language, though, as it
    substantially increases the complexity of what an enum value can be,
    I think.

-   Initialization of Swift's raw-valued enum type is quite similar, and
    pleasantly so, to Python's initialization of enums.

-   In a surprising change from the usual, Swift's syntax for binding variable
    names when pattern matching against an enum is *more* verbose than Rust's,
    requiring the use of either a leading `let` on the `case` statement if all
    the elements are of the same type, or a `let` in front of each element
    otherwise:

    ```swift
    var matchedValue: String
    let matchee = 3.14159
    switch matchee {
    case 3.14159:
        matchedValue = "pi"
    case _:
        matchedValue = "not pi"
    }
    ```

    In Rust, a matched pattern can simply bind its value directly:

    ```rust
    let matchee = 3.14159;
    let matchedValue = match matchee {
        3.14159 => "pi".to_string(),
        _ => "not pi".to_string()
    };
    ```

-   Swift has the ability to do recursive enumerations with its `indirect` type.
    This is conceptually interesting, but off the top of my head I can't think
    of a time when this would have been useful at any point since I started
    programming seven and a half years ago. The book's example of a recursive
    function a aliasing arithmetic expressions is fine, but not particularly
    illuminating to me. I suspect, though, that it might make more sense if I
    were more familiar with pure functional programming paradigms.

    **Edit:** a friend [points out]:

    > Indirect enums are useful for recursive types in general. There are a lot
    > of these: Lists, trees, and streams are the big ones that come to mind.

-   All those same lines: Rust does *not* have the ability to have recursive
    enumerations at present (or recursive `struct` types, for that matter), at
    least without heap-allocating with `Box` along the way. You *can* construct
    such a type, in other words, but you have to be explicit about how you're
    handling the memory, and it can't be stack-allocated.

    +   For an example of a recursive enumeration type (as well as an
        interesting/hilarious example of how you can easily confuse the
        compiler if you do this wrong), see [this Rust forum post][forum].

    +   For some discussion on stack- and heap-allocated memory in Rust, I'll
        shamelessly promote my Rust podcast, [New Rustacean]: take a listen to
        [e005: Allocate it where?][e005]

[_Maybe Haskell_]: https://gumroad.com/l/maybe-haskell
[points out]: https://alpha.app.net/jws/post/65990633
[forum]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/recursive-enum-types/2938
[New Rustacean]: http://www.newrustacean.com
[e005]: http://www.newrustacean.com/show_notes/e005/index.html

---

-  [Previous: Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]

Commit message:

Update Rust and Swift posts with link to 10.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-09.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (ix)
Subtitle: Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-11-09 22:20
Modified: 2015-11-10 06:15
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 9
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past few months. As with the
other posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html

---

-   Right off the bat when looking at the definitions for Swift's and Rust's
    `enum` types, a difference pops out: the use of the keyword `case` to
    introduce an enum member in Swift. In one sense, this overloads that
    keyword, but in another sense it's fine: pattern matching and enums go hand
    in hand, so the use in both cases is fairly natural. Rust doesn't have any
    special syntax to designate the elements of an enum; they're just separated
    by commas.

-   I am not at all shocked to find that Swift has a variant syntax for its unit
    type case declarations, where a single `case` keyword precedes a list of
    comma-separated cases defined on a single line. (At this point, I would be
    more surprised *not* to find a variant syntax for something in Swift!)

-   Something truly wonderful about both a Rust and Swift: enumerated types
    aren't just wrappers around integer values. They're real types of their own.
    This is powerful.

-   Rust and Swift also share in having enumerated types that can hold values.
    The most prominent of these so far in the Swift book are optionals, the
    `Optional` enum type, corresponding very closely to Rust's `Option` type.
    Having had these for a bit in playing with Rust, and having gotten familiar
    with the utility of types like these while reading [_Maybe Haskell_]---a
    delightful book which introduces Haskell and functional programming using
    Haskell's `Maybe` type---I now miss them profoundly in languages which don't
    have them. (Which is to say: every language I use on a regular basis
    professionally: C, C++, Python, JavaScript, etc.).

-   Swift's enum types don't have integer values *by default*---but they can
    have them if you define a type and assign a value to each enum case at the
    definition. These "raw values" are distinct from the "associated values"
    noted just above. I expect these exist primarily for ease of interoperation
    with Objective-C.

-   Rust doesn't have anything like this, at least that I can think of. The main
    place it would be useful would be for foreign function interfaces (as in
    Swift), and this is one of several such gaps in Rust, along with the lack of
    a straightforward way to map to C's `union` types. There are trade offs in
    terms of adding the functionality to the language, though, as it
    substantially increases the complexity of what an enum value can be,
    I think.

-   Initialization of Swift's raw-valued enum type is quite similar, and
    pleasantly so, to Python's initialization of enums.

-   In a surprising change from the usual, Swift's syntax for binding variable
    names when pattern matching against an enum is *more* verbose than Rust's,
    requiring the use of either a leading `let` on the `case` statement if all
    the elements are of the same type, or a `let` in front of each element
    otherwise:

    ```swift
    var matchedValue: String
    let matchee = 3.14159
    switch matchee {
    case 3.14159:
        matchedValue = "pi"
    case _:
        matchedValue = "not pi"
    }
    ```

    In Rust, a matched pattern can simply bind its value directly:

    ```rust
    let matchee = 3.14159;
    let matchedValue = match matchee {
        3.14159 => "pi".to_string(),
        _ => "not pi".to_string()
    };
    ```

-   Swift has the ability to do recursive enumerations with its `indirect` type.
    This is conceptually interesting, but off the top of my head I can't think
    of a time when this would have been useful at any point since I started
    programming seven and a half years ago. The book's example of a recursive
    function a aliasing arithmetic expressions is fine, but not particularly
    illuminating to me. I suspect, though, that it might make more sense if I
    were more familiar with pure functional programming paradigms.

    **Edit:** a friend [points out]:

    > Indirect enums are useful for recursive types in general. There are a lot
    > of these: Lists, trees, and streams are the big ones that come to mind.

-   All those same lines: Rust does *not* have the ability to have recursive
    enumerations at present (or recursive `struct` types, for that matter), at
    least without heap-allocating with `Box` along the way. You *can* construct
    such a type, in other words, but you have to be explicit about how you're
    handling the memory, and it can't be stack-allocated.

    +   For an example of a recursive enumeration type (as well as an
        interesting/hilarious example of how you can easily confuse the
        compiler if you do this wrong), see [this Rust forum post][forum].

    +   For some discussion on stack- and heap-allocated memory in Rust, I'll
        shamelessly promote my Rust podcast, [New Rustacean]: take a listen to
        [e005: Allocate it where?][e005]

[_Maybe Haskell_]: https://gumroad.com/l/maybe-haskell
[points out]: https://alpha.app.net/jws/post/65990633
[forum]: https://users.rust-lang.org/t/recursive-enum-types/2938
[New Rustacean]: http://www.newrustacean.com
[e005]: http://www.newrustacean.com/show_notes/e005/index.html

---

-  [Previous: Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
-  [Next Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
