content/tech/rust-and-swift-11.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (xi)
Subtitle: Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.
Date: 2016-01-10 10:00
Tags: software development
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 12
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past few months. As with the
other posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html

---

I've still been (slowly) working through the Swift book and comparing Swift and
Rust; I have another draft started which I'll hopefully finish this week. And I
still find the comparison deeply profitable. The two languages continue to
evolve in interesting ways, and the comparison is all the more interesting [now
that Swift is open-source][oss-swift] and its future [open for community
input][proposals] (just as [Rust is][RFCs]).

[oss-swift]: https://github.com/apple/swift
[proposals]: https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution
[RFCs]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs

Something I've been thinking about for several months, and which the [brief
discussion of Swift, Go, and Rust][overcast] at the end of the latest
[Accidental Tech Podcast][ATP] brought back to my mind, is the question of what
the next generation of systems-level programming language should be. And my
answer is: there shouldn't be *just one*. The best possible thing for the space,
in many ways, is for there to be a healthy diversity of options and lots of
competition in the space. We don't want to have *ten* different systems
programming languages to deal with, I think---but three or four or five would be
*much* preferable to having one or two (closely related) as we have in the
decades of C and C++ dominance.

[overcast]: https://overcast.fm/+CdSzsTIY/1:16:42
[ATP]: http://atp.fm/episodes/151

Don't get me wrong: both languages (and perhaps especially C) do many things
exceptionally well. For all that they are (justly) maligned for some of their
problems, the logevity of both C and C++ has a great deal to do with how well
they fit the problem domain, and how much they've empowered developers to
accomplish within that space (which is very, *very* large).

The problem, though, at least as I see it, is that the existence of only two
really serious systems programming languages for the last several decades has
led a lot of developers to think that C and C++'s ways of solving problems are
the *only* way to solve problems. The languages we use shape the way we think
about possible solutions, and when a given language doesn't recognize entire
classes of different approaches, that deeply limits developers' ability to
tackle certain issues. (See also the interesting CppCast [interview with D's
Andrei Alexandrescu][D] in which he makes similar points.)

[D]: http://cppcast.com/2015/10/andrei-alexandrescu/

The most obvious thing missing from both is the ability to do truly
functional-style programming. C of course is also lacking classes and thus is
much more difficult to use for any sort of object-oriented programming.[^oop]
Neither has anything remotely like Rust's traits or Swift's extensions; C++ has
only gotten lambdas recently.

All of this comes out to mean that the set of *tools* available to systems
programmer has necessarily been missing any number of things available in
languages outside that context. In some cases, this may be a necessary
consequence of the kinds of programming being done: when you need totally
deterministic memory and compiler behavior, dynamic typing and a non-trivial
runtime are simply not options. But in many cases, they are simply a function of
the history of the languages' development and history. Being an ALGOL
descendant, and especially a C descendant, means there are some fundamental
choices about the language which will differ from those made in a language
descended from ML.

All of which is to say: C and C++ have been really useful tools in many ways,
but having *only* C and C++ available for serious systems programming work over
the last decades has left many developers blind to or simply unaware of the real
advantages other paradigms might offer them.

So going forward, I don't want there to be *a winner* in the systems programming
space. I'd rather see D, Rust, Swift, Go, and maybe even a few other contenders
all stay strong---finding their own niches and continually pushing each other
and learning from each other. That will give us a space in which different
languages are free to try out different approaches to the same problems, without
being tied to the specific constraints faced by other languages. Built-in
greenthreading? Go! Hindley-Milner types, memory safety, and zero runtime? Rust!
Something in beween, highly expressive and with different type systems and
tradeoffs around memory management, etc.? Swift, or D!

Having a robust, thriving set of competitors in the market will be good for the
languages themselves. But it will also be good for developers. It will take off
some of the blinders that come from a single language (or a pair of very closely
related languages) dominating the ecosystem. It will make it likelier that
people will be more familiar with different programming paradigms. And that can
only be a good thing, as far as I'm concerned.

---

-   [**Previous:** Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]


[^oop]: It is of course entirely possible to do non-classical OOP; the point is
    that C entirely lacks *language-level* facilities for OOP, inheritance, etc.

Commit message:

Publish Rust-and-Swift posts 12 and 13.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-11.md, after:

12. [Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]

[12]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xii.html
---
Title: Rust and Swift (xi)
Subtitle: Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.
Date: 2016-01-10 10:00
Tags: software development
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 12
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past few months. As with the
other posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.
12. [Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]
13. [Methods, instance and otherwise.][13]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[12]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xii.html
[13]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xiii.html

---

I've still been (slowly) working through the Swift book and comparing Swift and
Rust; I have another draft started which I'll hopefully finish this week. And I
still find the comparison deeply profitable. The two languages continue to
evolve in interesting ways, and the comparison is all the more interesting [now
that Swift is open-source][oss-swift] and its future [open for community
input][proposals] (just as [Rust is][RFCs]).

[oss-swift]: https://github.com/apple/swift
[proposals]: https://github.com/apple/swift-evolution
[RFCs]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rfcs

Something I've been thinking about for several months, and which the [brief
discussion of Swift, Go, and Rust][overcast] at the end of the latest
[Accidental Tech Podcast][ATP] brought back to my mind, is the question of what
the next generation of systems-level programming language should be. And my
answer is: there shouldn't be *just one*. The best possible thing for the space,
in many ways, is for there to be a healthy diversity of options and lots of
competition in the space. We don't want to have *ten* different systems
programming languages to deal with, I think---but three or four or five would be
*much* preferable to having one or two (closely related) as we have in the
decades of C and C++ dominance.

[overcast]: https://overcast.fm/+CdSzsTIY/1:16:42
[ATP]: http://atp.fm/episodes/151

Don't get me wrong: both languages (and perhaps especially C) do many things
exceptionally well. For all that they are (justly) maligned for some of their
problems, the logevity of both C and C++ has a great deal to do with how well
they fit the problem domain, and how much they've empowered developers to
accomplish within that space (which is very, *very* large).

The problem, though, at least as I see it, is that the existence of only two
really serious systems programming languages for the last several decades has
led a lot of developers to think that C and C++'s ways of solving problems are
the *only* way to solve problems. The languages we use shape the way we think
about possible solutions, and when a given language doesn't recognize entire
classes of different approaches, that deeply limits developers' ability to
tackle certain issues. (See also the interesting CppCast [interview with D's
Andrei Alexandrescu][D] in which he makes similar points.)

[D]: http://cppcast.com/2015/10/andrei-alexandrescu/

The most obvious thing missing from both is the ability to do truly
functional-style programming. C of course is also lacking classes and thus is
much more difficult to use for any sort of object-oriented programming.[^oop]
Neither has anything remotely like Rust's traits or Swift's extensions; C++ has
only gotten lambdas recently.

All of this comes out to mean that the set of *tools* available to systems
programmer has necessarily been missing any number of things available in
languages outside that context. In some cases, this may be a necessary
consequence of the kinds of programming being done: when you need totally
deterministic memory and compiler behavior, dynamic typing and a non-trivial
runtime are simply not options. But in many cases, they are simply a function of
the history of the languages' development and history. Being an ALGOL
descendant, and especially a C descendant, means there are some fundamental
choices about the language which will differ from those made in a language
descended from ML.

All of which is to say: C and C++ have been really useful tools in many ways,
but having *only* C and C++ available for serious systems programming work over
the last decades has left many developers blind to or simply unaware of the real
advantages other paradigms might offer them.

So going forward, I don't want there to be *a winner* in the systems programming
space. I'd rather see D, Rust, Swift, Go, and maybe even a few other contenders
all stay strong---finding their own niches and continually pushing each other
and learning from each other. That will give us a space in which different
languages are free to try out different approaches to the same problems, without
being tied to the specific constraints faced by other languages. Built-in
greenthreading? Go! Hindley-Milner types, memory safety, and zero runtime? Rust!
Something in beween, highly expressive and with different type systems and
tradeoffs around memory management, etc.? Swift, or D!

Having a robust, thriving set of competitors in the market will be good for the
languages themselves. But it will also be good for developers. It will take off
some of the blinders that come from a single language (or a pair of very closely
related languages) dominating the ecosystem. It will make it likelier that
people will be more familiar with different programming paradigms. And that can
only be a good thing, as far as I'm concerned.

---

-   [**Previous:** Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
-   [**Next:** Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]


[^oop]: It is of course entirely possible to do non-classical OOP; the point is
    that C entirely lacks *language-level* facilities for OOP, inheritance, etc.
