content/tech/rust-and-swift-07.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (vii)
Subtitle: Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-19 15:00
Modified: 2015-09-20 13:42
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 7
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html

---

  - Both Rust and Swift have *pattern-matching*, and with what appears to be
    fairly similar basic behavior. (I touched on this briefly in my [first post
    in the series].) In Rust this goes under the `match` construct, with matches
    specified like `<pattern> => <expression|statement>`, optionally with guards
    specified with `if` expressions. In Swift, patterns are matched using the
    `switch` construct, with matches specified like `case <pattern>:
    <expression|statement>`, optionally with guards specified with `where`
    expressions. (`where` is also used in Rust, but for generic constraints, not
    pattern match guards.)

  - Both languages allow you to bind names to a matched pattern: Swift with
    `case let <name>` and Rust simply by using the name in a normal
    destructuring expression as part of the match definition.

    **Edit:** that's not *quite* right. In Rust, you use the `@` operator with
    the variable name you want to bind in the match.

    **Edit the second:** I was mixed up, because Rust actually has *both* of
    those options. You can either match directly, e.g. when getting the value of
    an `Option` type: `Some(value)` as the pattern will bind `value`. But if you
    need to bind a specific part of more complicated data structure, the `@`
    operator is present to let you do it in a fairly straightforward way.

  - Both languages allow for the use of `_` as a "wildcard" in match
    definitions. Since match definitions in Rust use the patterns directly, the
    equivalent of Swift's C-like `default` is simply a wildcard match pattern
    (`_ => <-expression|statement>`).

  - One significant difference: like its `if` blocks, Rust's `match` blocks are
    expressions, so they can be assigned. I.e., you can write this:

    ```rust
    let test = 5u32;
    let description = match test {
        0..10 => "less than ten",
            _ => "greater than ten",
    }
    println!("{?:}");  // "less than ten"
    ```

    Swift doesn't let you do this; the same thing there would be written like
    this:

    ```swift
    let test: UInt32 = 5
    var description: String
    switch test {
        case 0..<10:
            description = "less than ten"
        default:
            description = "greater than ten"
    }
    println("\(description)")
    ```

  - Both languages have `break` statements, but in Rust they're only used in
    loop constructs, while Swift (like C) uses them to escape `case`s as well.
    The Swift book gives an example of one place they're necessary in a
    `switch`: to match a case and do nothing there (e.g. `default: break`). In
    Rust, you would simply supply an empty block for that scenario (e.g. `_ =>
    {}`).

  - Correctly, both languages force you to match exhaustively on relevant
    patterns. If you're matching an enumerated type, for example, you must
    handle every enumerated value. You can of course do this with wildcard
    patterns or with Swift's `default`, but the good thing is that both
    languages will refuse even to compile if a given pattern isn't matched.

  - Swift's default behavior around its `switch` statements is sane: it does
    *not* automatically fall through into the next statement. It does let you do
    this, without checking the condition on the next statement (as in C), using
    the `fallthrough` keyword. Rust, by contrast, simply doesn't allow this at
    all.

  - Both languages supply named control statements (loops, etc.), with slightly
    different syntax for naming them. Rust's, curiously, shares its syntax with
    lifetime definitions---more on those in a future post.

  - I don't believe Rust has anything quite like Swift's `guard`s, which allow
    you to leave normal or expected control flow in the main body of a block,
    with a secondary block for cases where the `guard` isn't matched. This isn't
    a huge deal, but it does fit as a nice convenience into the typical `if let`
    pattern in Swift. Basically, it just lets you elide an empty `if` block and
    supply only the `else` block.

    **Edit:** a friend [points out] that Swift `guard`s also require you to exit
    the current scope, so it's unambiguous what you're doing if you use them.

[first post in the series]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[points out]: https://alpha.app.net/jws/post/64804111

---

  - [Previous: Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
  - [Next: Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]

Commit message:

Update Rust-and-Swift posts with published IX.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-07.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (vii)
Subtitle: Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-19 15:00
Modified: 2015-09-20 13:42
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 7
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1. [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2. [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3. [Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.][3]
4. [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5. [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6. [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7. Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.
8. [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9. [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[3]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html

---

  - Both Rust and Swift have *pattern-matching*, and with what appears to be
    fairly similar basic behavior. (I touched on this briefly in my [first post
    in the series].) In Rust this goes under the `match` construct, with matches
    specified like `<pattern> => <expression|statement>`, optionally with guards
    specified with `if` expressions. In Swift, patterns are matched using the
    `switch` construct, with matches specified like `case <pattern>:
    <expression|statement>`, optionally with guards specified with `where`
    expressions. (`where` is also used in Rust, but for generic constraints, not
    pattern match guards.)

  - Both languages allow you to bind names to a matched pattern: Swift with
    `case let <name>` and Rust simply by using the name in a normal
    destructuring expression as part of the match definition.

    **Edit:** that's not *quite* right. In Rust, you use the `@` operator with
    the variable name you want to bind in the match.

    **Edit the second:** I was mixed up, because Rust actually has *both* of
    those options. You can either match directly, e.g. when getting the value of
    an `Option` type: `Some(value)` as the pattern will bind `value`. But if you
    need to bind a specific part of more complicated data structure, the `@`
    operator is present to let you do it in a fairly straightforward way.

  - Both languages allow for the use of `_` as a "wildcard" in match
    definitions. Since match definitions in Rust use the patterns directly, the
    equivalent of Swift's C-like `default` is simply a wildcard match pattern
    (`_ => <-expression|statement>`).

  - One significant difference: like its `if` blocks, Rust's `match` blocks are
    expressions, so they can be assigned. I.e., you can write this:

    ```rust
    let test = 5u32;
    let description = match test {
        0..10 => "less than ten",
            _ => "greater than ten",
    }
    println!("{?:}");  // "less than ten"
    ```

    Swift doesn't let you do this; the same thing there would be written like
    this:

    ```swift
    let test: UInt32 = 5
    var description: String
    switch test {
        case 0..<10:
            description = "less than ten"
        default:
            description = "greater than ten"
    }
    println("\(description)")
    ```

  - Both languages have `break` statements, but in Rust they're only used in
    loop constructs, while Swift (like C) uses them to escape `case`s as well.
    The Swift book gives an example of one place they're necessary in a
    `switch`: to match a case and do nothing there (e.g. `default: break`). In
    Rust, you would simply supply an empty block for that scenario (e.g. `_ =>
    {}`).

  - Correctly, both languages force you to match exhaustively on relevant
    patterns. If you're matching an enumerated type, for example, you must
    handle every enumerated value. You can of course do this with wildcard
    patterns or with Swift's `default`, but the good thing is that both
    languages will refuse even to compile if a given pattern isn't matched.

  - Swift's default behavior around its `switch` statements is sane: it does
    *not* automatically fall through into the next statement. It does let you do
    this, without checking the condition on the next statement (as in C), using
    the `fallthrough` keyword. Rust, by contrast, simply doesn't allow this at
    all.

  - Both languages supply named control statements (loops, etc.), with slightly
    different syntax for naming them. Rust's, curiously, shares its syntax with
    lifetime definitions---more on those in a future post.

  - I don't believe Rust has anything quite like Swift's `guard`s, which allow
    you to leave normal or expected control flow in the main body of a block,
    with a secondary block for cases where the `guard` isn't matched. This isn't
    a huge deal, but it does fit as a nice convenience into the typical `if let`
    pattern in Swift. Basically, it just lets you elide an empty `if` block and
    supply only the `else` block.

    **Edit:** a friend [points out] that Swift `guard`s also require you to exit
    the current scope, so it's unambiguous what you're doing if you use them.

[first post in the series]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[points out]: https://alpha.app.net/jws/post/64804111

---

  - [Previous: Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
  - [Next: Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
