content/tech/rust-and-swift-03.md, before:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (iii)
Subtitle: Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-07 11:55
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 3
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html

---

  - I just hit operators in the Swift book. First question: are operators
    special syntax, or are they sugar for `protocol`s? (Every modern language I
    use or even have played with handles them as sugar for another language
    construct---Python, Ruby, Io, Elixir, and Rust, to name just a few ranging
    over a substantial variety of ages and styles.)

  - Oh. I did the requisite digging, and operators are functions (which is okay)
    defined in the global namespace (_:sigh:_). I say "okay" rather than good
    because the justification offered is that this is the only way to make the
    operators work as binary operators between existing instances of types. But
    that elides the fact that, if that's the case, it is so because of other
    language design decisions. This seems like a perfect place to use a
    `protocol`, but perhaps (unlike Rust's `trait`) they're not sufficiently
    capable to handle this? That's an open question; I have no idea about the
    answer.

  - Interestingly, Rust has several fewer operators than Swift, even apart from
    those mentioned in my [previous post][2]. It drops the pre- and
    post-increment operators entirely (as does Python), since their results can
    always be accomplished in other ways with less potential for confusion.
    Swift keeps them, no doubt in part because most (Objective) C programs are
    deeply familiar with them and with idioms associated with them.

  - I learned a few new things about Rust's operators as well: the Boolean `||`
    and `&&` operators and its bit wise `|` and `&` operators differ not only in
    that the former are *short-circuit* operators and the latter are not.
    Obviously you can also do things like bit-wise flag operations with the
    latter, but the reference emphasizes the short-circuiting behavior. This
    makes perfect sense, but it wasn't something I'd ever considered explicitly
    before.

  - There is no ternary operator in Rust, because of how it handles the
    relationship between expressions and statements. Swift keeps it. That's an
    interesting reflection of differences in design: Rust dropped it because
    `if` blocks are expressions, so it's redundant, and they have had a goal of
    removing unnecessary features. (See the discussion on dropping the ternary
    operator---with an interesting aside from Brendan Eich on
    JavaScript---[here][#1698]). Note that this is not a criticism of Swift,
    just an observation, though I do really like Rust's expression-driven
    approach.

  - The `??` "nil coalescing operator", on the other hand, I actively dislike.
    This seems like shorthand for the sake of shorthand, partly necessitated by
    the existing drive toward shorthand with optional types in Swift. Sometimes
    brevity can lead to decreased clarity. Eliding too much, or subsuming it
    into shorthand, makes the language harder to hold in your head and requires
    you to slow down more for parsing each line.

  - Nothing surprising (or different) between the standard boolean operators in
    the two languages.

  - I wonder how many times the word "concise" (or synonyms of it) appear in the
    Swift book? It's increasingly clear to me reading that brevity is one of the
    primary design goals. Maybe it's just me, but that actually seems a little
    weird. Brevity is good so far as it goes, but *legibility* is much better.

[#1698]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/1698

---

  - [**Previous:** Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
  - [**Next:** Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]

Commit message:

Publish Rust-and-Swift posts 12 and 13.

content/tech/rust-and-swift-03.md, after:

---
Title: Rust and Swift (iii)
Subtitle: Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.
Tags: software development, listicles
Date: 2015-09-07 11:55
Series:
  Title: Rust and Swift
  Part: 3
...

<i class="editorial">I am reading through the Swift book, and comparing it to
Rust, which I have also been learning over the past month. As with the other
posts in this series, these are off-the-cuff impressions, which may be
inaccurate in various ways. I'd be happy to hear feedback! Note, too, that my
preferences are just that: preferences. Your tastes may differ from mine.</i>

Parts in the Series
-------------------

1.  [Thoughts after reading the introduction to the Swift book.][1]
2.  [Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
3.  Operators, including overloading, and thoughts on brevity.
4.  [Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
5.  [The value (and challenge) of learning languages in parallel.][5]
6.  [Collection types and the difference between syntax and semantics.][6]
7.  [Pattern matching and the value of expression blocks.][7]
8.  [Functions, closures, and an awful lot of Swift syntax.][8]
9.  [Sum types (`enum`s) and more on pattern matching.][9]
10. [Classes and structs (product types), and reference and value types.][10]
11. [Hopes for the next generation of systems programming.][11]
12. [Properties: type and instance, stored and computed.][12]
13. [Methods, instance and otherwise.][13]

[1]: /2015/rust-and-swift-i.html
[2]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ii.html
[4]: /2015/rust-and-swift-iv.html
[5]: /2015/rust-and-swift-v.html
[6]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vi.html
[7]: /2015/rust-and-swift-vii.html
[8]: /2015/rust-and-swift-viii.html
[9]: /2015/rust-and-swift-ix.html
[10]: /2015/rust-and-swift-x.html
[11]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xi.html
[12]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xii.html
[13]: /2016/rust-and-swift-xiii.html

---

  - I just hit operators in the Swift book. First question: are operators
    special syntax, or are they sugar for `protocol`s? (Every modern language I
    use or even have played with handles them as sugar for another language
    construct---Python, Ruby, Io, Elixir, and Rust, to name just a few ranging
    over a substantial variety of ages and styles.)

  - Oh. I did the requisite digging, and operators are functions (which is okay)
    defined in the global namespace (_:sigh:_). I say "okay" rather than good
    because the justification offered is that this is the only way to make the
    operators work as binary operators between existing instances of types. But
    that elides the fact that, if that's the case, it is so because of other
    language design decisions. This seems like a perfect place to use a
    `protocol`, but perhaps (unlike Rust's `trait`) they're not sufficiently
    capable to handle this? That's an open question; I have no idea about the
    answer.

  - Interestingly, Rust has several fewer operators than Swift, even apart from
    those mentioned in my [previous post][2]. It drops the pre- and
    post-increment operators entirely (as does Python), since their results can
    always be accomplished in other ways with less potential for confusion.
    Swift keeps them, no doubt in part because most (Objective) C programs are
    deeply familiar with them and with idioms associated with them.

  - I learned a few new things about Rust's operators as well: the Boolean `||`
    and `&&` operators and its bit wise `|` and `&` operators differ not only in
    that the former are *short-circuit* operators and the latter are not.
    Obviously you can also do things like bit-wise flag operations with the
    latter, but the reference emphasizes the short-circuiting behavior. This
    makes perfect sense, but it wasn't something I'd ever considered explicitly
    before.

  - There is no ternary operator in Rust, because of how it handles the
    relationship between expressions and statements. Swift keeps it. That's an
    interesting reflection of differences in design: Rust dropped it because
    `if` blocks are expressions, so it's redundant, and they have had a goal of
    removing unnecessary features. (See the discussion on dropping the ternary
    operator---with an interesting aside from Brendan Eich on
    JavaScript---[here][#1698]). Note that this is not a criticism of Swift,
    just an observation, though I do really like Rust's expression-driven
    approach.

  - The `??` "nil coalescing operator", on the other hand, I actively dislike.
    This seems like shorthand for the sake of shorthand, partly necessitated by
    the existing drive toward shorthand with optional types in Swift. Sometimes
    brevity can lead to decreased clarity. Eliding too much, or subsuming it
    into shorthand, makes the language harder to hold in your head and requires
    you to slow down more for parsing each line.

  - Nothing surprising (or different) between the standard boolean operators in
    the two languages.

  - I wonder how many times the word "concise" (or synonyms of it) appear in the
    Swift book? It's increasingly clear to me reading that brevity is one of the
    primary design goals. Maybe it's just me, but that actually seems a little
    weird. Brevity is good so far as it goes, but *legibility* is much better.

[#1698]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/1698

---

  - [**Previous:** Basic types and the syntax around them.][2]
  - [**Next:** Language design tradeoffs, highlighted by string manipulation.][4]
