Title: Surprising Unity
Date: 2014-03-25 07:10
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: [devotions]
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 63, Proverbs 25, and 1 Corinthians 1&ndash;3
Summary: The fount of the "surprising unity" that should characterize the church is the work of the Triune God.
Template: formats/devotions

The surprising unity[^1] of the church has been a recurring theme on my mind
lately. Reading through 1 Corinthians was sure to bring the notion back to the
forefront, of course: the book has several prominent topics, but unity is the
one to which Paul returns again and again and the one with which he opens the
book. The first few chapters are an indictment of the Corinthians for their
factionalism, punctuated[^2] by a theological grounding for that indictment.

In terms of structure, Paul's epistles to the Corinthians are fairly unique
among his writings. Unlike the normal structure of his letters, in which there
are fairly clear divisions between expository and hortatory material (though
with the requisite qualification that he is often including some exhortations
during the exposition and vice versa), his letters to the Corinthians are
constantly jumping back and forth between the two. He makes a point, grounds it
in the nature of the gospel, and then repeats. First Corinthians circles back to
the theme of unity over and over again in this fashion.

In 1 Corinthians 1:18--2, Paul explains the call to unity he laid out in chapter
1 and to which he returns in chapter 3 in terms of Christ's and the Spirit's
work. What Christ did looked like an incomprehensible weakness to the Jews who
were expecting their messiah to come in power, and incomprehensible folly to the
Greeks who expected any true leader to come in a demonstration of wisdom. Both
of these Jesus set on their heads. In this surprising inversion---so typical of
Christ's work---is forged the grounds for Christian unity. None of us have cause
for boasting; God is our wisdom and our power, our righteousness and
sanctification and redemption.

All of this is accomplished in our midst by the Spirit. Not only do we have
nothing apart from Jesus Christ, but we cannot even rightly appropriate him and
what he offers on our own. This strength and wisdom we have in Christ is
mediated by the Spirit of God. What Paul taught, he taught not in human wisdom
by "by the Spirit" (1 Corinthians 2:13), and only those who were empowered by
the Spirit could understand them. They were (and are) folly to anyone who is
operating in human understanding alone.[^3]

The unity of the church, which is one of the ways that the world knows us as
Christ's (per the Gospel of John) is, like everything in our faith ultimately a
gift from the Triune God. We must actively obey the call to unity, and it will
not happen without our effort, but it is Father-given, Son-mediated, Spirit-
empowered obedience to walk in a Father-given, Son-mediated, Spirit-empowered
way. In some sense, this is *all* of our sanctification: learning more and more
to obey in humble dependence on God who is our all in all.

[^1]: A phrase I borrowed from one our pastors at First Baptist Durham, Dr. Andy
    Davis.

[^2]: You can almost think of the structure as analogous to a sentence with
    content set off by an em-dash---like so, with some explanatory comment here
    in the middle---and then continuing to a conclusion. Yes, that's an absurdly
    nerdy comparison.

[^3]: One might suggest that the issue is *fallen* human understanding, and this
    is right so far as it goes... but the reason fallen human understanding
    fails is because it is not reliant on God. Unfallen, or restored, human
    understanding is wise precisely because it fears Yahweh (cf. Proverbs 1:7).