Title: Bind It On Your Forehead
Summary: Memorizing a book of the Bible yields remarkable fruit. It shapes us and transforms our thinking.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-04-07 06:30
Template: formats/devotions
Passages: Psalm 72, Proverbs 7, and Colossians
Category: theology
Tags: [devotions]

One of the real joys of memorizing Scripture is the way that---by the grace of
God---it slowly shapes you and (trans)forms the way you think. Jaimie and I have
been memorizing Colossians this spring, and we will have finished the book by
the end of April, Lord willing. I read through the book this morning, and found
great joy in that I can see the contours of Paul's letter much more clearly and
understand the book much more deeply. Even more, though, I am extremely glad for
the ways I can see that the book is shaping me.

Several days last week, I woke up with various verses from the book echoing in
my mind---Col. 1:23's encouragement to hold fast to the faith, Col. 1:15--19's
magnificent and beautiful Christology, Col. 2:20--23's admonition to lean on
Christ and not on worldly asceticism, Col. 1:29's picture of Paul's hard work
for the sake of the gospel... It is difficult to overstate the impact it has on
one's life to have a book like this constantly ringing in one's mind. Its
contents are now always ready to be drawn upon as I encounter opportunities and
trials.

Colossians' sweep from the doctrine of Christ and salvation to our eminently
practicable response is typical of Paul, and reminds me that we cannot ever
separate the two. When the book enjoins men like me, "Husbands, love your wives,
and do not be harsh with them... Fathers, do not provoke your children, lest
they become discouraged" (Col. 3:19,21), this is entirely dependent on the
reality that I have been raised with Christ and know that I will appear with him
in glory when he returns (Col. 3:1--4).

My ethical response (Col. 3:5--4:2) finds its foundation in the assurance of
what God *has* done and the hope of what he *will* do. My ability to carry out
that response is wholly based on my unity with Christ: that in him spiritually I
died and have been raised (cf. Col. 2:20, 3:1). He is my life (Col 3:4). There
is no separating our obedience, our pursuit of holiness, from his gracious work
on our behalf. He did and does and will do, and we respond. Neither can we fail
to respond and say that we are truly in Christ nor perform moral acts of any
worth if we reject Christ.

And daily I find myself meditating on and turning to these realities and
commands. I am led to worship, and led to obedience. Praise God for Colossians,
for his command to know his word by heart.