Title: Almost Too Good To Be Believed
Date: 2014-03-24 07:10
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: [devotions]
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 61&ndash;62, Proverbs 24, and Luke 22&ndash;24
Summary: The final chapters of Luke are absolutely packed with material. They show us our fallen humanity and the wonder of our Lord's work side by side.
Template: formats/devotions

The final chapters of Luke are absolutely *packed* with material. The chapters
sweep from the Jewish leaders' plot with Judas to get Jesus' turned over to
them, through Jesus' celebration of the Passover with his disciples,[^1] through
his prayers in the garden and betrayal by Judas, through his multiple farcical
trials, through his brutal crucifixion and death, to his resurrection from the
dead and revelation of himself as the Anointed One of God to his disciples.
Luke's narrative up to this point has a fairly measured pace, with a great deal
of time devoted to long stretches of Jesus' teaching, but here at the climax
event piles on event in a way that seems designed to take one's breath away.
*Here* is the finale toward which Jesus had been pointing ever since the [hinge
in the book][hinge] back in the ninth chapter: his death and resurrection.

A few observations that particularly stood out to me today. First, when Jesus
instituted the Lord's Supper, he also told his disciples of the betrayal that
would shortly come at one of their hands, and they were troubled. They "began to
question one another, which of them it could be who was going to do this" (Luke
22:23). What Luke drops in next is a surprise:[^2] at the same time, they
started arguing about who was the greatest (22:24). They did not recognize that
the same basic impulse that would motivate one of them to betray the one they
confessed as Lord and Messiah---fallen human self-absorption and
self-interest---also motivated this discussion of greatness. Jesus upends this,
pointing out here that he had come "as the one who serves" (22:7). Their reward
would be greater than any of them could wish: being enthroned beside him to
judge the twelve tribes of Israel---but because they had stayed with him in his
trials, not because of their own inherent greatness (22:28--30).

Jesus instructed the disciples to sell a cloak to buy a sword, learned that they
had a pair of swords, and told them that it was enough (22:37--38). Then, when
the disciples actually went to use those swords, Jesus forbade them, and undid
what they had done. It is almost as if he made sure that they had the swords
there precisely so that he could teach this object lesson. The Anointed One of
God came not to kill but to be killed, just as he had come not to be served but
to serve.

In his trial, Jesus simply did not answer his accusers. They took his silence,
and his acknowledgment that they were accusing him, as all the proof they
needed. Why? Because they needed no more proof than their accusations.
Interestingly, both Herod and Pilate clearly abuse their authority, causing
Jesus to be mocked and beaten even while admitting that they found nothing for
which he ought to be punished (still less crucified). Pilate in particular comes
off looking terrible: he repeatedly tells the crowd that he can see no reason
why Jesus ought to be crucified, and that he intends to let him go, but caves to
the pressure of the crowd (23:1--25). The fear of man can lead us to do wretched
things. Pilate decided to release a murderer and insurrectionist---the latter
being precisely the crime of which Jesus was accused!---instead of an innocent
man, because of the demands of a crowd.

Barabbas himself strikes me as an interesting figure in Luke's narrative. He was
what Jesus was accused of being, and he went free with Jesus taking his place.
Every time I read through this passage, it strikes me again that Luke gave us
here a clear picture of the substitutionary work of Christ on our behalf. Here
we have a man who clearly deserved his punishment under the law of his day,
going free with Jesus being punished instead. I have no idea whether Barabbas
ever truly appreciated what happened to him, by which I mean whether he repented
of his sins and believed in the one who was his substitute in more ways than
one. I do know that the picture, especially when set side by side with Paul's
teaching on the topic, reminds me that *I* am like Barabbas in the story: set
free because of Jesus' going in my stead.

Finally, I love reading the narratives of the resurrection. It was then as it is
now: too good to be true, almost too good to be believed. The disciples, though
Jesus had taught them that he would die and be resurrected, simply did not grasp
his meaning. Even when they were told that he had been raised, they did not
believe it until he showed himself to them---and then they thought they saw a
ghost until he convinced them by eating some fish! The resurrection was in no
one's game plan but God's. But now it is our future hope and our joyful
expectation as well. And it is because of the resurrection from the dead that
they went, and that we go to proclaim repentance and forgiveness of sins in
Jesus' name to all nations (Luke 24:46--47).

[^1]: Apparently a couple days early, based on Luke's comments in chapter 23 and
John's narrative.

[^2]: Though yet again one obscured by the [blasted heading markers inserted in
the text][headings].

[hinge]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/lukes-hinge.html
[headings]: http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/money-parables-and-divorce-and-remarriage.html