Title: A Repeated Call to Humility
Subtitle: Proverbs 1 and the Need for Wisdom
Date: 2014-04-01 06:40
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: [devotions]
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 68, Proverbs 1, and 2 Corinthians 1&ndash;3
Summary: Every time I come back to Proverbs 1, I am confronted again with the necessity of humbling myself before our transcendently wise God.
Template: formats/devotions

Every time I come back around to Proverbs 1 I find myself all the more
challenged to pursue wisdom. This month will be my third time through the book
this year, since I have been reading it start to finish each month (save
February, where I read through some of the other Wisdom literature). I had not
spent much time with the Proverbs over the past few years, in part because I had
struggled to and not known how to integrate them with the broader flow of the
Scriptures. Several things persuaded me to integrate them into my daily reading
this year. First of all, this is the word of God! All of it is profitable for
us---enough said. Second, as I have walked further into adulthood, I have
increasingly recognized the need for wisdom, whether in my own life or in caring
for other believers. The world is a hard and complicated place this side of the
New Jerusalem, and it is only by having deep, sound, Godly wisdom that we can
walk it well.

The book tells us its purpose from the outset:

> | To know wisdom and instruction,  
> |     to understand words of insight,  
> | to receive instruction in wise dealing,  
> |     in righteousness, justice, and equity;  
> | to give prudence to the simple,  
> |     knowledge and discretion to the youth---   
> | Let the wise hear and increase in learning,  
> |     and the one who understands obtain guidance,  
> | to understand a proverb and a saying,  
> |     the words of the wise and their riddles.
>
> <p class="citation">---Proverbs 1:2--6</p>

Then it tells us how this will all be accomplished:

> | The fear of the <span class=smcp>Lord</span> is the beginning of knowledge;  
> |     fools despise wisdom and instruction.
> 
> <p class="citation">---Proverbs 1:7</p>

So here I am again, being reminded that "the fear of Yahweh is the beginning of
knowledge; fools despise wisdom and instruction." (In some sense, that made me
bordering on a fool for several years as I skipped over this simply because I
did not understand it. Shouldn't the response be exactly the opposite?) If I
want to understand mysteries and riddles, to understand proverbs and sayings, to
receiving instruction in wise dealing, righteousness, justice, and equity, to
become prudent and knowledgeable and wise, to increase in learning, to obtain
guidance---and who would not want these things?---then I start by fearing
Yahweh.

Situated against the backdrop of the canon, this opening is all the more
compelling. It is not fear of God generically that is the beginning of wisdom,
nor even knowledge that there is a creator. It is personal knowledge of the
<span class=smcp>Lord</span>, of *Yahweh*, the covenant God of Israel. This
cannot be separated from knowing who Yahweh is as he is revealed in the rest of
Scripture. Yet if I am truly to grow in knowledge and understanding of
righteousness---one of the chief topics of the Bible!---then I must come time
and again to these words, and seek wisdom. I must time and again humble myself
before our Creator-Savior-God and recognize that my own wisdom and the wisdom of
the world around me is ultimately bankrupt. I have nothing to teach God; from
him I have everything to learn.

And it can only be learned in that posture of humility before transcendent
wisdom that surpasses human understanding. That is the lesson of *Qoheleth*
(Ecclesiastes): as we turn and begin to seek wisdom on our own, we will
increasingly fall into folly. No wonder, then, that immediately following the
invitation to be wise here in Proverbs 1, in Lady Wisdom's first monologue,
comes a rebuke and a warning to fools and simpletons who do not seek true
wisdom. It is an easy enough course to take---the easiest, the most natural for
us as fallen people---but it is deadly. There is a cost when I fail to fear
Yahweh and keep his ways.