---
Title: A Just and Merciful God
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-06-30 08:00
Template: formats/devotions
Passages: 1 Chronicles 10&ndash;23
Category: theology
Tags: [devotions]
Summary: God is holy and we ought not ignore his word. He is merciful&mdash;and we ought not ignore his word!
---

My devotional life has been a bit up and down the last few months. It is easy to
let it drop off in the midst of all the busyness of the end of a semester, and
easy, too, in the midst of caring for a new baby and a recovering wife simply
not to find the time for it. But my soul needs to encounter the living God day
by day.

Today's reading was not exactly scintillating in many ways: reading in
Chronicles rarely is. But as I have often reflected in the past several years,
Paul had in mind the Old Testament---books like this and Numbers and Leviticus,
those we find hardest!---when he told us that *all* Scripture is breathed out by
God and profitable for us (2 Tim. 3:16). That is no less true of Chronicles'
recounting of the deeds of David's mighty men or the assembly of Israel to
anoint him king than it is of the gospel accounts of Jesus' life and death. We
need all of these pieces to fully understand the work of God.

A few points I take away from my reading this morning:

#### God is holy.

There are two accounts that make this abundantly clear in the section I read
today: the death of Uzzah, the judgment on David for his sin with the census. In
the case of Uzzah, God brooked no deviation from his clearly articulated correct
way for the transportation of the Ark of the Covenant. That Uzzah meant well did
not change the reality that he (and indeed all of David's initial foray to bring
the Ark to Jerusalem) had ignored what God had said. Ignoring God's word is no
light matter. We sometimes blanch at the severity of this judgment, but to
ignore when God speaks is to make light of his speech---to insult him and
quietly rebel in precisely the same way our first parents did in the Garden. It
is to say our own wisdom is sufficient when he has expressly given us *his*
wisdom.

The second case, God's judgment for David's census, is interesting in that the
text does not expressly tell us what David's sin was, yet it is obvious that he
did sin and in such a way as to anger God profoundly. Joab, who was instructed
to carry out the census, clearly understood that it was wrong; so did David.
Given the backdrop of the regulations of censuses in the Pentateuch, it seems
that David was going about it for the wrong reasons, and without following the
pattern God had laid out.[^1] Yet David went ahead anyway. God responded in
judgment. Again: it came down to a simple refusal to do as God had instructed.

These two accounts remind me that I must obey God. It is as plain and simple as
that---whatever the circumstances, whatever apparent justification I might
muster for doing otherwise, I need to obey. God is holy; he does not brook
unrighteousness. Yes, he has atoned for my unrighteousness, but this was true of
David as well (see below). I am still called to live in obedience to him, and
insofar as I lead, I am responsible to lead others to do so as well.

[^1]: See J. A. Thompson, _1, 2 Chronicles_, vol. 9, The New American Commentary
    (Nashville: Broadman & Holman Publishers, 1994), 160.

#### God is merciful.

This second passage of judgment also highlights God's mercy. Yahweh sent the
angel to bring destruction on the people for David's sin, but Yahweh *relented*,
too---and this before David did anything at all. Sometimes we can make the
mistake in reading the Old Testament of thinking that Yahweh had always to be
appeased *before* he would turn back from his righteous judgments, but the
reality is the opposite. The vast majority of the time, Yahweh relented simply
because of his forbearance and mercy and patience. Many times when the people
clearly had not yet relented, the pleas of one righteous person on their behalf
led him to stay his hand. Other times, like here, he stayed his judgment without
*anyone* standing in that position---simply because he is merciful.

It was this reality with whicih Paul wrestled "out loud," so to speak, in
Romans: how can a just God overlook sins? How can he just pass over and *not*
execute judgment when judgment is so clearly deserved?[^2] The answer for Paul
was not to make less of the sin God passed over, but to make that much more of
Christ. The Old Testament believers like David were saved by the death and
resurrection of Christ just as we are.  We are called to faith and trust in the
one who has made it possible for the righteousness of God to be cause for our
*hope* rather than despair. And here is the flipside of the call to obey God's
word inherent in those earlier passages: the call to *trust* God as he has
spoken to us. This is good news, if we will but believe it and cling to it.

[^2]: What a contrast to our own reasoning, in an age when we can hardly
    conceive of the notion of deserved judgment.
