---
Title: Miscellanies, 26 March 2013
Date: 2014-03-26 06:30
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: [devotions]
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 64, Proverbs 26, and 1 Corinthians 4&ndash;6
Summary: Some devotional thoughts on Psalm 64, Proverbs 26, and 1 Corinthians 4&ndash;6.
Template: formats/devotions
---

Today's passages did not connect in any particular way in my head, but all bear
some reflection. Perhaps by the time I am done writing, I will see a connection.

###### Psalm 64

Reading through the Psalms often serves as a reminder for me that the easy way
of life I enjoy is not normal either in historical terms or in normative terms
for the people of God. Suffering and opposition are *ordinary*, so much so that
prayers for deliverance from the plots of the enemies of God are themselves
ordinary in the Psalms. Certainly for David such things were a regular part of
his life, and so it has been for many believers throughout the ages, and so it
is today for many around the world.

The Psalm does not stop with the acknowledgement that there are people in the
world would do God's people harm, though. It moves immediately on to the reality
that God delivers his people. The inversion is striking: those who lay in
ambush, who "shoot arrows" at the innocent find *God's* arrows coming for them
(Psalm 64:4,7). In the small narrative arc this song traces out, the ambushers
who set out to destroy the righteous are themselves destroyed. Their destruction
leads all the world to magnify God. The righteous rejoice in Yahweh, take refuge
in him, and exult.

It strikes me that in a way, this arc is a very short telling of the arc of
history itself. The enemies of God have a time in which they can work, but
ultimately they will be ended, and all the earth will be filled with the glory
of Yahweh.

###### Proverbs 26

The first half of this chapter is a sequence of comparisons: increasingly
terrible or ridiculous things with a fool.[^2-1] The fact that the fool comes
off looking absurd is the point---so that when we get to Proverbs 26:12, the
conclusion is all the more forceful:

> Do you see a man who is wise in his own eyes?
> There is more hope for a fool than for him.

As bad as it is to be a fool---a point that both the book as a whole and the
preceding ten verses have labored to make clear---being wise in one's own eyes
is even worse.[^2-2] The book has made clear over and over again that there is
basically no hope for a fool, though Wisdom is still inviting even fools to turn
from their ways (Proverbs 8:5). But for the man who is wise in his own eyes,
what recourse is there?[^2-3]

[^2-1]: Interrupting the sequence is the classic wisdom paradox of the book:
Proverbs 26:4--5, withits paired injunctions to answer and not to answer a fool
according to his folly.

[^2-2]: The rhetorical force of the placement of this particular set of proverbs
near the end of the book, as well as the structure of this section, is one of
many arguments for a coherent editorial strategy in the creation of Proverbs.
All you have to do is read the book to get this.

[^2-3]: This verse is one of the keys in my understanding of Ecclesiastes:
*Qoheleth* was wise in his own eyes, and it nearly destroyed him.

###### First Corinthians 4--6

What better picture of reliance on one's own wisdom than the church at Corinth?
One can nearly see Paul tearing his hair out over this church, which seemed
determined to run off into the weeds in every possible way. By the end of
chapter 6, he has already addressed factionalism, sexual immorality of an
extraordinary sort, and Christians suing each other in court. Moreover, he has
had to deal with the fact that they considered themselves wiser than the
apostles (basically throughout all of chapter 4). Following this so-called
wisdom was destroying them.

A few highlights that particularly caught my attention here:

1. Paul admonished his audience to judge themselves rightly, but to remember
   that even in their own self-judgment they had to acknowledge that God alone
   knows all our faults.
2. As for outsiders, the church was not to "judge" them, leaving that to God.
   Judgment here must imply something besides moral assessment, however, because
   Paul explicitly calls out the follies of the unregenerate world (e.g. sexual
   immorality, greed, swindling, idolatry---see 1 Corinthians 5:10). It means
   rather that the Corinthians' response was not to be the rejection enjoined of
   them as regarded unrepentant people in their own midst. The church exercises
   discipline on its members, not on the world.
3. When Paul encourages the Corinthians to reject sexual immorality, he grounds
   it in the resurrection. Indeed, Paul turns to the resurrection about as often
   (and perhaps more often) as to the cross in this book---a point N. T.
   Wright's delightful and excellent _The Resurrection of the Son of God_ makes
   forcefully. God raised Jesus from the dead, and he will raise us from the
   dead, so we ought to regard our bodies accordingly. They are temples of God
   indwelt by the Spirit, and ultimately destined for glory. *That* is why we
   ought to flee sexual immorality.
