---
Title: Sell Your Possessions and Give to the Needy
Subtitle: For where your treasure is, there will your heart be also.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-18 22:00
Tags: [devotions]
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 59, Proverbs 18, and Luke 12&mdash;13
Summary: Jesus tells us to sell our possessions and give to those in need. Most of us are not exactly doing that. Time for a heart check.
Template: formats/devotions
---

I was reading Luke 12 during my devotions this morning, and was struck again by
the force of verses 32--34, where Jesus tells his gathered disciples:

> Fear not, little flock, for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the
> kingdom. Sell your possessions, and give to the needy. Provide yourselves with
> moneybags that do not grow old, with a treasure in the heavens that does not
> fail, where no thief approaches and no moth destroys. For where your treasure
> is, there will your heart be also.

Those words are compelling and troubling. "Sell your possessions and give to the
needy." These are not difficult to understand. Nor, in truth, are they
particularly difficult to put into practice. The early church clearly saw that
they should behave this way, and did so: just look at Acts 2:44--45, 4:32--35.
This is not the pattern I see in the church around me today, for the most part.
Nor, more worrisome, is it exactly the pattern of my own life.

To be sure, Jaimie and I have long since established habits of sacrificial
giving.[^1] We aim to be generous with our things, not holding them tightly, as
well as with our time and our home. We have aimed to be hospitable, to open our
home to those who need space, and so on. But I am not sure that I would say we
are always characterized by this. I do not think we have ever sold one of our
things *in order* to be willing to give it to someone in need. As I ponder, I
have no doubt that if one of our brothers or sisters in Christ were in great
need---and especially one of those in our church---we would be willing to do so.
But we have *not* done so, and so this passage forced me to think about a
Christ-following ethic regarding our possessions.

I am sitting here typing this on a very nice computer, in a very nice home, with
many niceties around me. I have no doubt that we could sell some of these things
in order to have money to give to others. I am left wondering: *should* we? It
does not seem to me to be possible always to be selling the things we have to
give them to others. Eventually one would simply run out of things to sell.

I note, too, that the context here shows us that Jesus is addressing a very
specific fault: worry about and pursuit of wealth. In this section he takes aim
at dependence on material possessions for security, pointing us to trust in God
instead of our things. He hammers away at the idea that we could somehow provide
for ourselves better than God does. We reminds us that all we have will be
destroyed in the end. He undercuts all our idolatry in this area. It would be
easy, then, to say that his words here are illustrative to that end, and not
really meaning quite what they seem to say. I think any such move would do the
text an injustice. Jesus said what he said, and we had better pay attention.
More: we had better obey.

It is not the having of things that is the problem, it seems to me. It is
clinging to them. It is seeing them as more important than people. The question
I pondered earlier is the important one: *Would Jaimie and I gladly part with
possessions to serve others who are in need?* The answer to that is certainly
yes---and indeed, we *have* parted generously with our money and our things in
the past. We have not *sold* possessions to give the proceeds to others, but
have at times foregone purchases to give the money to others, and we have given
items themselves to others in need. We are moving in the right direction here.
Nonetheless, the heart check is an important one, and one to which we prosperous
Americans should return regularly. It is too easy for us to justify sitting in
our comfort without regard to the needs around us, and to fail thereby to obey
Jesus' clear commands.

[^1]: I thought about listing the ways we give, then thought better of it in
light of *another* of Jesus' commands about how we should think about and act
about money.
