---
Title: 2016-05-29 10:07
Date: 2016-05-29 10:07
Tags: listicles
Template: formats/micro
---

<i class=editorial>I originally posted this as a [tweetstorm], but unlike in the past, where I've treated those tweets as the canonical form and linked them here, I'm now treating *this* as the canonical and adding a tweet to the end of that "topic" linking back here. [Indie web] forever.</i>

[tweetstorm]: https://twitter.com/chriskrycho/status/736921791940177920
[indie web]: http://indiewebcamp.com

---

- I was going to pull all my data from my long-since defunct GoodReads account to do something with the data locally.
- Unfortunately, I didn’t just stop using the account. As near as I can tell/recall, I completely deleted it—without downloading the data.
- Why I did this, I have *no* idea. I deleted it because the Amazon acquisition turned me off and I’d been growing bored with it anyway.
- But failing to download the data? This is just an enormous :facepalm: moment.
- Who knows, maybe I have it in an archive somewhere. I’m going to go looking. But I’m annoyed at myself anyway.
- One thing this reminded me: I’m increasingly a fan of “indie web” solutions. This data is *mine*, not Amazon’s—even if I trade it to them.
- The trick is: the trade had to be worth it, and (just as importantly) the data still has to be retrievable when I’m ready to move on.
- In this case, it is retrievable, and it’s my own fault if I don’t have it. But entities like Twitter and Facebook make that anything from “much harder” to “basically or actually impossible”. Let’s say I wanted to pull everything I’ve posted to Facebook to archive it. Could I?
- And, just as importantly, could someone who doesn’t know how to write a program to access a web API?
- (The answers there are: *maybe* I could, but definitely no one who’s isn’t a programmer could. And that’s simply bad for users.)

A friend [comments][1]:

> FWIW you can download a big fat zip file with all the stuff you’ve ever uploaded to Facebook

[and][2]:

> it comes in a pretty simple HTML layout. I do it every 6 months or so for backup.

[1]: https://twitter.com/sleepy_keita/status/736931883884253185
[2]: https://twitter.com/sleepy_keita/status/736932109403574274
