Title: More Than We Could Have Hoped
Summary: Hebrews points us to the wonder of what we have as those who live when Christ has already come&mdash;and it is wonderful indeed.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-04-17 13:35
Template: formats/devotions
Passages: Psalm 75, Proverbs 17, and Hebrews 4:14&ndash;8:13
Category: theology
Tags: [devotions]

The past week was something of a bumpy ride. I got sick---the kind of sick that
makes you feel terrible and want to do nothing but sleep for days on end. The
kind of sleep that makes you long for a resurrection body. Then my lovely wife
got sick at the beginning of this week. Accordingly, I have not written these
posts, nor (much worse) been as consistent in my readings as I would like.
Still: here I am again, diving back in. The discipline of writing these posts
continues to prove fruitful for me as an exercise in thinking rightly about God
and in being consistent in my devotional reading. It also helps keep my
wordsmithing at least a little fresh, even if I have noted that writing these
little notes is a very different skill than writing academically or even
longer-form blog posts. Still: much of four months in (and far too many days
missed), this remains a valuable use of my time.

---

Reading in Hebrews is always a source of enormous spiritual encouragement to me.
I am not sure I could picka favorite book in the Bible: every time I read a bok
again, Ifind new depths and treasures in it. A few do stand out, though: Isaiah,
several of the minor prophets, Colossians, and Hebrews tend to speak to me with
particular force. Whatever the reason---some mix of my personality and
temperament with the things God desires to accomplish in me---Hebrews simply
delights me time and again.

Reading through these chapters, I am captured by the author's emphasis on two
realities. The first is the central thrust of the book: the supremacy of Jesus
Christ over every would-be religious competitor, even the religious competitors
of the tradition from which he came. For the author of this epistle, none of the
trappings of Judaism---glorious and good though they were---could measure up to
Jesus. But this is because of the second thing that always comes home in reading
this letter: the author saw Jesus as the perfect fulfillment of all the things
toward which Old Testament belief had pointed. The temple, the priesthood, the
old kingship... all of these things were aiming for Jesus. When he came, there
was no need for those old things: not because they were bad, but because they
had been replaced by something impossibly better. The symbol had been supplanted
by the reality.

It is easy to take that for granted, living this side of the incarnation of God
and this side of the inauguration of his kingdom. But we ought not. We ought to
look at the Old Testament with joy that we see clearly what the prophets longed
to see but *did not*. We ought to read those pages of expectation and longing
and exult that the longing has been satisified. Yes, we live still in the time
between the times, when Christ has come but has yet to come again---but we live
in the time between the times: Christ *has* come. All those pointers and
prophecies and hints and hopes that ran from Adam through Noah down to Abraham
and on past David's kingdom into the words of the prophets and even in exile and
return to the land---we see them clear as can be in God-the-Son who died on our
behalf and lives on our behalf.

We have a high priest who never dies again, and who therefore never has to lay
aside his priesthood, never has to cease his prayers. We have a priest who had
no need to atone for his own sin, but in his own self atoned for all our sin
once and for all. We need no further sacrifices. We have a perfect intercessor.
We have Jesus, author and perfector of our faith. We have everything we need,
and more than we ever could have hoped. Hallelujah.