Title: From Redemption to Creation
Date: 2014-03-27 07:27
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: devotions
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 65, Proverbs 27, and 1 Corinthians 7&ndash;10
Template: formats/devotions
Summary: Psalm 65&rsquo;s move from redemption to creation&mdash;instead of the other way around&mdash;surprised me in the best way possible.

The structure of Psalm 65 surprised me. The psalm opens with a declaration of
God's worthiness of praise and a statement of his atonement[^1] and
righteousness on behalf of his saints, then moves to a depiction of his power in
creation. For some reason, I expected the Psalmist to move the other direction
if he were going to bring these two things together in a single Psalm. Perhaps
it is the way we often tell the story in explaining the gospel---creation, fall,
redemption, restoration---but moving from salvation from sins and reconciliation
with God to creation caught me off guard.

So often, I fall into a bad habit of separating the attributes of God---as
though God were a collection of properties and not *persons* who all share in
the same nature. We cannot separate his creative nature from his saving love for
us any more than we can separate the same kinds of things in ourselves. Do I
write poetry for my wife because I am creative,[^2] or because I am loving?
Both, of course: any split between the two is a false disjunction. When I write
her a poem, I am drawing on multiple facets of my personality and exercising
multiple faculties and bending my will to accomplish one end *through* another
end. One can write poetry for its own sake, and one can love one's wife without
poetry, and one can write poetry for one's wife. Bringing the two together is no
strange thing.

So it is with God, and so this psalm reminds us. God creates because he is
creative, and also he creates because of his love for his creatures. He
delighted to make a good world for us. In creation he demonstrates his power and
his wisdom, and in creation he also demonstrates his deep and abiding affection
for those whom he created. The particularity of God's relationship to his
covenant people ("God in Zion," Psalm 65:1) is inseparable from his relationship
to all the world ("the hope of all the ends of the earth," 65:5). Then, when the
Psalmist moves from the specificity of God-in-Zion's redemption for iniquities
to the fact that he created the world and maintains it, he shows us the unity of
God's love and the inseparability of his actions. It is not as if God provides
rain for all the world out of duty or obligation; he does so because he delights
to do good toward we his children---even in our rebellion! The result is that
"those who dwell at the ends of the earth are in awe at [his] signs" (65:8).
God's atonement, reconciling his people, doing righteousness and justice, and
his creative and sustaining power in creation all come around to the same end:
the world worshipping him, the world in right relation with him.

So with David, and with the meadows, I want to "shout and sing together for joy"
(65:13) at all the works of the God in Zion. It is good to be surprised.

[^1]: Not the point of today's meditations, but nonetheless worth note: contra
    many an overly simplified evangelical presentation of the relationship
    between the eras before and after the Incarnation, Old Testament believers
    relied on God for their salvation from sins just as we do. They knew that he
    was the one who atoned for them (Psalm 65:3) and that it was he who brought
    them near, not the other way around (Psalm 65:4).

[^2]: No claim here that I am particularly *good* at poetry, mind, but Jaimie
    seems to like it, and that is good enough for me.