content/pages/now.md, before:

---
Title: Now
Subtitle: What am I up to these days?

---

## Life

- We're about to move to Colorado---probably heading out from North Carolina in mid to late October. We're buying a ridiculously amazing house on a ridiculously amazing lot: literally a mountain lake house in the foothills of the Front Range in Monument, Colorado.
- We got to see totality in the 2017 total solar eclipse! It was the most amazing thing I've ever seen.
- I'm training for a full marathon ([City of Oaks](http://cityofoaksmarathon.com), at which I've run the half marathon event 3 of the 4 years we've lived here). Mileage is getting there, but given the move I'm currently not sure I'll actually be able to participate.

## Speaking

- I'm giving a talk titled "Becoming a Contributor" at Rust Belt Rust 2017, October 26–27. The abstract:

    > So, you’re new to the Rust community. (Or any community, really!) And you want to help, but, well, you’re new. So how exactly do you start contributing? What kinds of contributions are valuable? We’ll talk about everything from asking questions to writing documentation, from pitching in on forums and chat to writing blog posts, and from starting your own projects to contributing to other open-source projects.

    [Registration here](https://www.eventbrite.com/e/rust-belt-rust-conference-2017-registration-36237335847), and New Rustacean listeners can use code `newrustacean` to get 20% off.

## Podcasts

- [New Rustacean](http://www.newrustacean.com) -- a podcast about learning the Rust programming languare. Updates 2--3⨉ each month.
- [Winning Slowly](http://www.winningslowly.org) -- taking the long view on technology, religion, ethics, and art; cohosted with [Stephen Carradini](http://stephencarradini.com). Usually updates biweekly; we've been in flux with Stephen finishing a Ph.D., his wife delivering their first baby, and their all moving from North Carolina to Arizona in the course of 2017. Getting back on the normal schedule this fall.
- [Mass Affection](https://www.massaffection.com) -- playing through the _Mass Effect_ with my wife. I've got two episodes we need to publish. We got distracted with things besides video games this summer, but we'll be back at it.

## Projects

- My main non-work, non-family goal right now is to make the experience of writing TypeScript and Ember.js together awesome. [typed-ember](https://github.com/typed-ember) on GitHub is where all the action is at. I've also been writing a series of blog posts, ["Typing Your Ember"](http://www.chriskrycho.com/typing-your-ember/), to help people get off the ground.
- I'm keeping track of my reading this year via my [2017 book list](http://www.chriskrycho.com/2017-book-list.html). One of my goals is, for new books I read, to write at least a *short* review of them.
- [lightning.rs](https://github.com/chriskrycho/lightning-rs/) -- my static site generator project in Rust, which I'm trying to spend one [pomodoro](http://www.chriskrycho.com/2017/log-all-the-things.html) session on every work day. I got tired of the project languishing.

### On Hold

- [Rust and Swift](http://www.chriskrycho.com/rust-and-swift.html) -- I tabled this to work on a project of the same focus for O'Reilly, who ended up canceling the project. I'm not sure I'll ever go back to it. I was really enjoying it, but that really burned me out, and in the meantime both Swift and Rust have moved on, a *lot*.

## Career

- I finished my M. Div. in May 2017. *Finally.*
- I also went full-time at Olo at the same time. I'm now a Senior Software Engineer focused on making the experience of ordering food online as amazing as it can be. (We have a long way to go!)

Commit message:

Add Rust Belt Rust talk: script and slides.

content/pages/now.md, after:

---
Title: Now
Subtitle: What am I up to these days?

---

## Life

- We're about to move to Colorado---probably heading out from North Carolina in mid to late October. We're buying a ridiculously amazing house on a ridiculously amazing lot: literally a mountain lake house in the foothills of the Front Range in Monument, Colorado.
- We got to see totality in the 2017 total solar eclipse! It was the most amazing thing I've ever seen.
- I'm training for a full marathon ([City of Oaks](http://cityofoaksmarathon.com), at which I've run the half marathon event 3 of the 4 years we've lived here). Mileage is getting there, but given the move I'm currently not sure I'll actually be able to participate.

## Speaking

-   I gave a talk titled "Becoming a Contributor" at Rust Belt Rust 2017, October 26–27. The abstract:

    > So, you’re new to the Rust community. (Or any community, really!) And you want to help, but, well, you’re new. So how exactly do you start contributing? What kinds of contributions are valuable? We’ll talk about everything from asking questions to writing documentation, from pitching in on forums and chat to writing blog posts, and from starting your own projects to contributing to other open-source projects.

    You can see the slides for the talk [here](/talks/rust-belt-rust/) or read the prepared script [here](/2017/becoming-a-contributor.html).

## Podcasts

- [New Rustacean](http://www.newrustacean.com) -- a podcast about learning the Rust programming languare. Updates 2--3⨉ each month.
- [Winning Slowly](http://www.winningslowly.org) -- taking the long view on technology, religion, ethics, and art; cohosted with [Stephen Carradini](http://stephencarradini.com). Usually updates biweekly; we've been in flux with Stephen finishing a Ph.D., his wife delivering their first baby, and their all moving from North Carolina to Arizona in the course of 2017. Getting back on the normal schedule this fall.
- [Mass Affection](https://www.massaffection.com) -- playing through the _Mass Effect_ with my wife. I've got two episodes we need to publish. We got distracted with things besides video games this summer, but we'll be back at it.

## Projects

- My main non-work, non-family goal right now is to make the experience of writing TypeScript and Ember.js together awesome. [typed-ember](https://github.com/typed-ember) on GitHub is where all the action is at. I've also been writing a series of blog posts, ["Typing Your Ember"](http://www.chriskrycho.com/typing-your-ember/), to help people get off the ground.
- I'm keeping track of my reading this year via my [2017 book list](http://www.chriskrycho.com/2017-book-list.html). One of my goals is, for new books I read, to write at least a *short* review of them.
- [lightning.rs](https://github.com/chriskrycho/lightning-rs/) -- my static site generator project in Rust, which I'm trying to spend one [pomodoro](http://www.chriskrycho.com/2017/log-all-the-things.html) session on every work day. I got tired of the project languishing.

### On Hold

- [Rust and Swift](http://www.chriskrycho.com/rust-and-swift.html) -- I tabled this to work on a project of the same focus for O'Reilly, who ended up canceling the project. I'm not sure I'll ever go back to it. I was really enjoying it, but that really burned me out, and in the meantime both Swift and Rust have moved on, a *lot*.

## Career

- I finished my M. Div. in May 2017. *Finally.*
- I also went full-time at Olo at the same time. I'm now a Senior Software Engineer focused on making the experience of ordering food online as amazing as it can be. (We have a long way to go!)
