content/theology/christology-class.md, before:

---
Title: >
    Christology: God With Us and For Us
Subtitle: Audio and notes from an adult Sunday School class I’m teaching at our church!
Date: 2019-08-11 20:15
Modified: 2019-08-12 06:15
Tags: [Christology, teaching, podcasting, church]
Category: Theology
Summary: >
    For the four Sundays starting today, I’m teaching a class at [our church], “Christology: God With Us and For Us”. If you like, you can check out the notes or recordings.

---

For the four Sundays starting today, I’m teaching a class at [our church], “Christology: God With Us and For Us”. The summary for the class:

> The topic of Christology probably sounds important, but it might also seem a little abstract or heady. But—as Colossians and Hebrews and many saints along the years will help us see—while Christology is indeed a feast for our minds, it is also comfort for our weary souls, because it’s our truest, deepest, richest picture of God’s love for us. By God’s grace, we’ll all come out encouraged by Jesus the Son’s work on our behalf, and stirred up to love and worship him more!

If you’re interested, you can find each week’s notes and audio on the [dedicated page for the class][page] (as on [the page for today’s lesson][first]), or you can follow along by subscribing in any podcast player in the teaching and sermons feed I set up for these kinds of things a few years ago:

- [Apple Podcasts][apple]
- [Overcast]
- [Pocket Casts]
- [RSS][feed]

(Note that, per my [standing principle][brand] of avoiding self-promotion and branding, this is the only time I’ll post about this series.)

[our church]: https://forestgate.org
[page]: https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us
[first]: https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/8/11/week-1-introduction-and-the-eternal-son
[apple]: https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/sermons-by-chris-krycho/id1083193863
[Overcast]: https://overcast.fm/itunes1083193863/teaching-and-sermons-by-chris-krycho
[Pocket Casts]: https://pca.st/slox
[feed]: https://v4.chriskrycho.com/sermons.xml
[brand]: https://v4.chriskrycho.com/2016/dont-be-a-brand.html

Commit message:

Update Christology article with downloads.

content/theology/christology-class.md, after:

---
Title: >
    Christology: God With Us and For Us
Subtitle: Audio and notes from an adult Sunday School class I’m teaching at our church!
Date: 2019-08-11 20:15
Modified: 2019-09-01 17:30
Tags: [Christology, teaching, podcasting, church]
Category: Theology
Summary: >
    For the four Sundays starting today, I’m teaching a class at [our church], “Christology: God With Us and For Us”. If you like, you can check out the notes or recordings.

---

<i class=editorial><b>Updated September 1, 2019:</b> added ePub and PDF links at the bottom of the post, as well as direct links to each class page on the Forestgate website.</i>

---

For the four Sundays starting today, I’m teaching a class at [our church], “Christology: God With Us and For Us”. The summary for the class:

> The topic of Christology probably sounds important, but it might also seem a little abstract or heady. But—as Colossians and Hebrews and many saints along the years will help us see—while Christology is indeed a feast for our minds, it is also comfort for our weary souls, because it’s our truest, deepest, richest picture of God’s love for us. By God’s grace, we’ll all come out encouraged by Jesus the Son’s work on our behalf, and stirred up to love and worship him more!

If you’re interested, you can find each week’s notes and audio on the [dedicated page for the class][page] (as on [the page for today’s lesson][first]), or you can follow along by subscribing in any podcast player in the teaching and sermons feed I set up for these kinds of things a few years ago:

- [Apple Podcasts][apple]
- [Overcast]
- [Pocket Casts]
- [RSS][feed]

If you prefer to read, you can see the full text I prepared (*not* identical with what I said: I extemporize!) at the pages for each day of teaching:

- [Week 1](https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/8/11/week-1-introduction-and-the-eternal-son)
- [Week 2](https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/8/18/week-2-israels-messiah-and-the-incarnation)
- [Week 3](https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/8/25/week-3-suffering-and-death-and-the-resurrection)
- [Week 4](https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/9/1/week-4-ascension-session-and-return-qampa)

You can also download the full text for all four weeks:

- [<abbr>PDF</abbr>](https://cdn.chriskrycho.com/file/chriskrycho-com/teaching/Christology.pdf)
- [<abbr>EPUB</abbr>](https://cdn.chriskrycho.com/file/chriskrycho-com/teaching/Christology.epub)
- [Word](https://cdn.chriskrycho.com/file/chriskrycho-com/teaching/Christology.docx)

(Note that, per my [standing principle][brand] of avoiding self-promotion and branding, this is the only time I’ll post about this series.)

[our church]: https://forestgate.org
[page]: https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us
[first]: https://forestgate.org/sunday-school/christology-god-with-us-and-for-us/2019/8/11/week-1-introduction-and-the-eternal-son
[apple]: https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/sermons-by-chris-krycho/id1083193863
[Overcast]: https://overcast.fm/itunes1083193863/teaching-and-sermons-by-chris-krycho
[Pocket Casts]: https://pca.st/slox
[feed]: https://v4.chriskrycho.com/sermons.xml
[brand]: https://v4.chriskrycho.com/2016/dont-be-a-brand.html
