Title: Learning Who We Are
Subtitle: Ecclesiastical Identity, Tradition, and Humility
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2015-03-26 08:00
Status: draft

I am in the middle of editing an "ecclesiastical identity" paper for my Baptist History class. Unlike many (perhaps most) of my peers here, I am not particularly comfortable in the Southern Baptist Convention—somewhat for cultural reasons, but primarily because I remain unpersuaded by some core Baptist convictions (and by the force with which Baptists hold other core convictions).[^1]

I imagine, though, that I'm not *alone* in this tension. In fact, I would guess that a lot of us feel this way. One of the challenges we face in a highly individualistic age is *not* to go running and jumping just because our traditions fit uncomfortably. Sometimes the traditions fit uncomfortably because they are wrong; sometimes it is because *we* are wrong. If I were to become a Presbyterian, I would not suddenly feel a lack of all such tensions. The particular tensions would change, and there might be fewer of them at present---though unless I changed my mind, paedobaptism would be a *larger* tension than any individual tension I feel presently---but tensions would remain.

These tensions are an inherent part of life lived before Christ's return. They indicate clearly to us that both our own and our church's convictions remain incomplete and at least partially inaccurate. However much we struggle to bring our understanding in line with Scripture, we will have gaps and be limited by our own cultural horizons. We should keep struggling forward; we must be individually, congregationally, and denominationally _semper reformanda_. But we press on aware that we are always reforming precisely because we have not yet arrived and will not have until Christ finishes his work in us in one glorious moment.[^2]

So we stand in this place of tension, inescapably. Too, we live in an increasingly post-denominational age. Though for various reasons of personal history I probably feel the detachment more than some of my peers here at Southeastern, I am far from alone. Part of this is the ways that intra-denominational cooperation has increased over the last decades. Some of it is increasing fragmentation of the existing denominations in cultural and doctrinal battles. Some of it is the rise of late modernity with its smorgasbord approach to religiosity. The vast array of churches and experiences available to us is simultaneously liberating and stultifying: liberating because I may yet find a church where I feel at home, and stultifying because such breadth of choice can easily produce paralysis.[^3]

Even that sense of liberation may be misleading, though. True, I may be able to find a congregation or denomination that feels *just right*---or at least, a little closer to it---than wherever I am at present. But there is a tension here. On the one hand, we have the necessity of intellectual integrity and the rightness of seeking to join ourselves with those whom we believe to be rightly following God's word, so far as we now have the opportunity to do so. On the other, we have the reality that a great deal of our church-searching is really shopping for what best pleases ourselves. We are hungry not to be quietly faithful in the tradition where God has placed us, but to go find the tradition that fits us better---shoppers in search of a particularly comfortable pair of sweatpants, rather than would-be athletes willingly reshaping their bodies into a better mold.

Of course, for those of us who *have* no tradition---who grew up in a wash of somewhat generic evangelicalism, perhaps with a dash of charismaticism or Southern culture or some other bit of seasoning---this is difficult at best. Had I grown up a Southern Baptist and were I (therefore) more persuaded of the solidity of those positions, this tension would probably still be present, but to a much lesser degree. But I did not. I grew up in a small, charismatic church that ceased to exist a few years ago. I spent time in one Southern Baptist church in college, then five years in a Bible church after that, and am now a Southern Baptist again---but one increasingly drawn to Presbyterianism on everything but baptism itself. How do I resolve this tension? For I must. It is not only unsatisfying but ultimately *wrong* to leave ourselves the final arbiters of our spirituality.

There is a reason Christians have long sought out the creeds, and there is a reason that Anglicanism, Roman Catholicism, and Eastern Orthodoxy have had such appeal to many who grew up in that wash of evangelicalism, and it is the same reason. In each of these traditions, there is a submission to the authority of the Church and her Tradition. While I cannot for doctrinal reasons join any of those denominations, I feel the tug.

We are drifting, we young evangelicals, and we are in need of some mooring lines. We *need* ecclesiastical traditions to ground us and set our faith in the context the great sweep of history. We need to be reminded that we are but little motes in the whole sky of air that is the church, or even our particular movement within the church. We need to know---to remember, really---that we are small, and the church very large. And yet our every culturally-derived instinct is to self-definition, rather than to submission.

Again, we need to be diligent, thoughtful caretakers of our own theology. A man's soul is his own responsibility. But it is also his neighbor's responsibility, and his neighbor's soul is his. Our individualism will ruin us; God chose to save a *people* and not merely a lot of *persons*. That distinction matters. It means that so far as we can, we are responsible to join ourselves not just to a bunch of other persons that we find to our taste, but to God's people as they go about his work. Yes, to God's people doing his will rightly, so far as we understand it, but also to a people whom we know God will use to remold our understanding of his work.

In short, we need to embrace the idea that the church owns us as much and more than we own her. We are not consumers of the goods the church supplies. We are her body, and when we run off because we think we might be more satisfied over *there*, we may just leave a congregation or even a denomination without a fingernail or an earlobe or a knee joint. We must practice being people who join deeply and are slow and very reluctant to leave. We must learn to see ourselves---and perhaps simply to put ourselves---in a tradition. We must be humble enough to grant that even if our tradition is wrong (and it is), so are we, and perhaps we have things to learn from each other. We must come to love God's people as a people, and to love his people more than our own comforts and desires. We need to settle down, stop roaming, and make a home together.

[^1]: Specifically, I am not persuaded on the autonomy of local congregations, and I find congregational rule as applied by Baptists somewhat out of step with my reading of the New Testament as well. And while I am a credobaptist---our daughters will be baptized only after a clear profession of faith!---I think the stridency of most Baptists on the issue misrepresents the clarity (or rather, the lack thereof) in the biblical text. I think the text tends (even strongly) toward credobaptism, but I find the covenantal view of baptism espoused by Presbyterians to be a relatively compelling reading as well. Arguments on infant baptism are inherently arguments from inference, and while I am persuaded of believer's baptism, I understand and am sympathetic to my Presbyterian brothers and sisters. The intractability of most Baptists I know on this issue frustrates me to no end.

[^2]: Given the beauty of learning and how integral a part of the human experience it is, I strongly suspect our *arguments* will be resolved but that many questions will remain. Surely an infinitely great God has an infinite amount to teach us. We are going to keep learning and growing in the coming age.

[^3]: See David Wells' _No Place for Truth_ for a thorough analysis of the problems of late modern/postmodern religiosity.